He trained in desktop publishing and combined his enthusiastic work ethic with new - found skills in a burgeoning industry . 
" I 've got more than a job ; I 've got a career . " 
Goodwill provides jobs at Goodwill . 
After a lifetime of trials , Donna not only earned her at Goodwill , she earned a job here . 
" I rode a bike to Goodwill in the rain and snow . 
I wanted  to be there  I had my second chance  to change my life . " 
Your gift to Goodwill will help the many people who  want  to tell their own stories of success . 
Your support will help them go to work . 
Please  use the enclosed envelope  to give a generous gift to Goodwill today  
Sincerely , William Carter , Chairman Goodwill Industries Foundation 
 
Your gift is a wise investment in the community . 
For every dollar donated * to Goodwill in 1998 , we helped our " graduates " earn an estimated $ 102  . 
 
November 15 , 1996 
Dear Personal Donor  
In the short while since Goodwill helped him find his job , Robert has learned  to thoroughly clean a motel room in about 40 minutes . 
His job objectives call for him to do it in 30 . 
He has no time 0  to waste  . 
Neither do we *?* . 
With the help of friends like you , Goodwill has continued  to adapt our services  to meet the human needs of our changing society . 
We do n't waste time as we are helping the community . 
And we do n't waste money . 
The gift that I am asking you  to make  will be used   to continue our mission of  helping people prepare for  , find  and keep  jobs . 
In their December , 1995 review of the nation 's best charities , News & World Report called Goodwill  one of the five " Standout Good Guys . " 
The magazine stated that Goodwill  as well as the other standouts  is " uniquely effective , innovative or valuable . " 
While I appreciate News & World Report 's endorsement , the true value of your support is measured  by the way 0 Goodwill takes on problems that  affect all of us  . 
Every time 0 we help someone find a solution to their employment barrier  , the positive effects radiate throughout our community : The business community welcomes not only another worker , but a consumer with increased purchasing power . 
Parents act as role models of self-sufficiency instead of dependency . 
Tax dollars that  would have been spent  on public assistance are saved  . 
You and I know that solutions to difficult problems do n't just happen . 
At Goodwill , it is the hard work of staff and those who  benefit from our services that  produces the kind of inspiring results 0 I see  every day : 
Goodwill staff member addresses a group of welfare recipients : 
" You can earn the money 0  to support yourself and your family , " she says 0  . 
" You can get off welfare . 
I know 0 you can *?*  I did *?* . " 
participant in a Goodwill program rushes back from a job interview  to share the results with his classmates in our desktop publishing training program . 
once his tears have subsided , he confirms what his classmates have already figured  out : he just received a job offer -- his first in five years . 
 Addressing a meeting at a neighborhood center , a Goodwill staff member tells the audience how Goodwill can help them find and keep jobs  . 
On his way home , he shares the story with four people at a street corner . 
At the next corner he tells five more . 
In order  to develop job skills , a man with some serious disabilities begins  working in Goodwill 's industrial division . 
It  takes a long time for him to gain the self-confidence  to work elsewhere in the community . 
Eventually , he turns your support into a payoff for all of us . 
He proudly leaves Goodwill  to support himself . 
These people and their successes are real . 
Just like the respect 0 we 've earned  from News & World Report . 
Just like the impact 0 Goodwill 's work has  on our community . 
Real work . 
Real results . 
real difference in people 's lives -- in all of our lives . 
The people who  can benefit most directly from your generosity have no time 0  to waste  . 
Neither do the rest of us who  feel the positive results of their success *?* . 
Your support helps  provide real solutions . 
Please  use the enclosed response card and envelope  to give generously to Goodwill today . 
 
December 10 , 1996 
Dear Mailhouse donor reminder  
You and I have done some important work together . 
We 've helped people break  free of the welfare cycle . 
We 've found ways for people with disabilities to enter the workforce . 
We 've expanded Goodwill 's proven methods to towns and neighborhoods where they are needed  most  . 
Of course , we 've played different roles . 
You have helped  make Goodwill 's work possible with your previous support . 
Goodwill has devised the programs that  turned your investment into results . 
Who has  benefited from our partnership ? 
Everyone has *?* . 
When you and I help somebody find a job  , one more person joins the ranks of tax payers , fewer tax dollars are spent  on public assistance and businesses gain another consumer . 
There are a lot of barriers that  keep people from  working : physical and mental disabilities , history of welfare dependency and lack of education or self-esteem . 
And there are a lot of people who  face these challenges every day of their lives . 
So our work must continue . 
Everyone benefits from the work 0 we do  together . 
Many people need our help . 
Please  continue our important partnership . 
 Support Goodwill with a generous donation today . 

November 15 , 1994 
Dear , 
 Think of your greatest accomplishments . 
 Think of the joy and success 0 they bring  to you and your loved ones . 
Michael Sims felt that way at age 39 -- the day 0 he earned a job  . 
Michael was born  with cerebral palsy . 
Upon  entering the work force , he discovered few job opportunities that  seemed  to match his abilities . 
For several years he performed packaging and clerical work . 
His most recent job lasted only a year before cut-backs eliminated his position . 
For 18 long months Michael could not find a job . 
He resorted to public assistance dollars  to survive . 
Finally , Michael called Goodwill . 
At Goodwill , Michael 's counselors felt that his personable demeanor could be a major attribute and identified for him a possible job-match where his people skills could shine  . 
After three interviews , Michael proved that he was the right person for the job . 
As the Clubhouse Monitor at Bent Tree Apartments , he now provides customer service for 50 to 60 tenants each night . 
At last , he has found success in a job that he loves  . 
Now his goals are set  on  moving up in the company . 
Every year , thousands of people come to Goodwill . 
Like Michael , they share two common characteristics . 
They face some barrier to employment and they want  to work . 
With support from people like you , they can overcome their barriers and earn success and the self-sufficiency that  comes with it . 
And then the pay-off begins for the entire community . 
Individual successes at Goodwill mean fewer persons receiving public support and more paying taxes . 
Last year , participants in Goodwill programs earned  -- and paid taxes on  -- wages of nearly $ 3.5 million  . 
Their successes at work also saved taxpayers more than three - quarters of a million dollars in public assistance . 
The savings are counted  in more ways than dollars and cents , however . 
The families of the new wage earners may feel the accomplishment in terms of a house 0  to live in  , money 0  to purchase food  -- without food stamps -- and the beginning of a family focused * on success , not hopelessness . 
Wo n't you help  make all of these successes possible ? 
Please  send the largest contribution 0 you can comfortably make  . 
Your gift will help  give new meaning to the word success -- for people who  have seldom had reason 0  to use the word  . 
Sincerely , James McClelland President 
 
Your gift will make a difference . 
 
Some of the strongest critics of our welfare system are the people who  have become dependent on it . 
Their complaint : the system discourages working because unemployment provides benefits that many entry-level jobs do n't include  . 
That 's where you -- and Goodwill -- come in  . 
We help people train for  and find  jobs that  make it  possible for them to get off of welfare . 
Last year , Goodwill placed 511 people  in jobs , more than double the number 0 we placed  in 1993 . 
While the debate on welfare reform is gathering like a storm at sea , the people who  need jobs are floundering . 
We need your support  to continue  getting people off of public assistance . 
Welfare is not the answer . 
And welfare reform is an uncertain solution with an unknown starting date . 
Goodwill works . 
Right now . 
Please  give the largest gift 0 you can *?*  to Goodwill today . 
 
March 17 , 2000 
Name Address City ,  , Zip 
Dear Name  
When Jerry was released  from prison  , he knew 0 it  would take hard work and determination  to straighten out his life . 
He knew 0 he had made a bad mistake , but despite his commitment to  rebuilding his life , he just did n't count on the obstacles that  would be thrown  up in his path . 
Reality hit when he was unable  to reconcile with his wife and ended up on the street  . 
He went to the Center Township Trustee for food stamps until he could find a job and a place 0  to live  . 
The Trustee referred him to the Blue Triangle where he consulted Goodwill 's Career Academy staff for job search assistance  . 
Jerry 's Goodwill caseworker found him a job immediately . 
But Jerry 's troubles did n't end there . 
The seasonal construction job 0 he obtained  soon ended , and he returned to Career Academy for help once more . 
 Unemployed , homeless and with a prison record , Jerry now faced  going back to prison for failure  to pay child support . 
It took some time and hard work , but with the help of Goodwill , Jerry was able  to work out a payment plan with the prosecutor 's office , find housing and conduct a more thorough job search . 
With unemployment at its lowest point in years in central Indiana , many people still have a hard time  finding meaningful employment . 
Of the more than 42,000 people 0 Goodwill served  in 1999 , over 5,000 of them have multiple barriers to  finding and keeping a job . 
Some , like Jerry , are ex-offenders . 
Some are blind , deaf or have other physical disabilities . 
More than 100 were homeless . 
But Goodwill offers hope even to people with numerous obstacles 0  to overcome  , like Jerry . 
With a promising new job at a plastic injection molding manufacturer , his legal troubles in check and a safe place 0  to live  , Jerry can get on with the business of  building a life for himself and contributing to his community . 
For as long as he needs it , Goodwill will continue  to help . 
Your support of Goodwill will provide job training and placement services  to help the hardest 0  to serve  in central Indiana find meaningful employment . 
And , with your assistance , Goodwill can help employers develop resources  to keep workers on the job . 
Please  make an investment in the stability of our community by  sending a gift to Goodwill . 
Your generosity will help people help themselves . 
 
June 21 , 1999 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear , 
Do you remember the combination of elation and apprehension 0 you felt  when you first left home  ? 
The young adults who  leave Pleasant Run have those same feelings . 
Very few have family support 0  to get them started  . 
Many need furniture , linens and other basic necessities  to begin lives on their own . 
 To help them establish themselves in the community , the Pleasant Run Emancipation fund was begun  in 1993 by private donors who  wanted  to provide a measure of financial support for those leaving our programs . 
Individuals who  are being emancipated  are eligible  to receive up to $ 500  from the Fund if they formally apply and meet four requirements : 
1. Release by the courts 
2. Successful completion of all life skills tests 
3. Positive termination of his or her Pleasant Run program 
4. Possession of a high school diploma or  
Proof of  meeting these , two staff reference letters and an essay stating why they should receive a grant  and how it will be used   are all reviewed  by a Pleasant Run panel , which  determines if the applicant merits the funds . 
Such fund are often used  for college tuition , vocational training or a deposit on an apartment . 
Because Pleasant Run is the only " family " for so many , our Emancipation Fund is one way 0 we can help a young person take the first steps into his or her new life as an independent and productive adult  . 
Without private donor support , this Fund does n't exist . 
Please  take a few minutes  to send a donation 0  to help one or more of our children successfully cross that threshold into the future . 
 
November 27 , 1995 
Dear Friend  
What kind of people  benefit by your contribution to Pleasant Run Children 's Homes ? 
Little ones , like Baby Jessica , caught * in the struggle between adoptive and birth parents . 
Older kids , like Tracy and Kerry , left *  homeless after a recent murder-suicide in Indianapolis claimed Mom and Dad . 
Young adults , like Mary , a jobless mother of three , trying desperately  to keep her kids out of trouble in a crime - ridden neighborhood . 
Real people  
There are thousands more . 
Families are being torn  apart , and too often , children are the victims . 
Kids like Tommie , made * a ward of the court because of repeated beatings by an alcoholic father : ; Alice , sent * to a group home  to get help because of severe behavior disorders : ; and John , a recovering alcoholic , rebuilding a relationships with his family so they can live together again . 
Pleasant Run Children 's Homes began  serving children nearly 130 years ago . 
Then the task was  to help children who  lost parents in the Civil War . 
Today , we serve children and families with a multitude of problems : emotional , physical , psychological and sexual abuse . 
Some come from families where , through therapy , there is hope for reunification  . 
For others , " families " are the counselors are housemates at the group homes where they live  . 
The biggest tragedy is that the problems do n't go away : ; they only grow . 
In 1994 Pleasant Run served 346 children and 125 families . 
In 1995 we will serve over 850 children and 340 families . 
In 1996 , these figures will triple . 
The children and families who  come to Pleasant Run are given  the opportunity  to become happy , loving , and productive members of our society . 
They welcome the chance  to belong , to become self - sufficient , to regain their self-esteem and confidence . 
Often it is a long , hard struggle , but the results are well worth it . 
For Pleasant Run to continue  to serve abused and neglected children and their families , we need your support . 
The Funding sources are shrinking , but the needs grow explosively . 
Please "  help good kids get better " by  sending us a contribution today . 
Your gift will give children and families hope for improved tomorrows . 
 
June 26 , 1995 
Dear Friend  
This is not newsletter . 
It is a fund - raising appeal . 
But there 's no reason why we should n't share good news at the same time  . 
Federal , state and local governments are freezing or withdrawing much - needed funding sources for people who  are truly in need . 
In spite of that , Pleasant Run Children 's Homes , with the help of hundreds of volunteers and others who  really care , continues  to make a significant impact on the futures of families and kids in need of help . 
We all hear about today 's increases in neglect , abuse and abandonment of those who  ca n't fight back : children . 
Yet few of us hear enough about kids who  live through these adversities and do make the grade . 
The positive side . 
These are special children . 
They come into a Pleasant Run program  whether it 's for therapeutic help in their own homes  which  nurtures whole families  , through foster care families or in the familial surroundings of our residential homes . 
For some , it 's a matter of weeks or months : ; for others , it 's years . 
They leave Pleasant Run , generally ,  ready and able  to contribute to society . 
We 're proud of our children and all that they overcome  . 
We are a not-for-profit , multi-service agency . 
We would n't exist if the need were n't there . 
The numbers of children who  deserve our services are rising  as quickly as our programs can grow  to serve them . 
Please  help us help them . 
Pleasant Run Children 's Homes  " where good kids get better  . " 
 
Dear Friends of Pleasant Run  
The holiday season is the time of year when we 're all busy  buying gifts , baking goodies , decorating our homes and making arrangements  to be with family and friends  . 
This is the time of year when we give thanks for the warmth and love that  surrounds us  . 
And this time of year is an occasion 0  to remember those not as fortunate as we are *?*  . 
Pleasant Run cares for at-risk children and families . 
We do this through a wide range of programs including community - based , therapeutic foster care , group homes and our treatment center . 
Many of the children are victims of abuse or live in unstable homes . 
Today we are asking you  to take a few minutes  to consider  making a contribution to Pleasant Run  to help the 1,500 children families 0 we care for  . 
Many of the children have no homes : ; no memories of joy from past holidays . 
Others are from families that  are struggling  to provide a healthy , happy environment but do n't have the resources 0  to make it possible . 
Your contribution will make a difference in a child 's life . 
It may help a family stay together . 
It can certainly make happy holiday memories . 
gift to Pleasant Run means 0 the children in our care will have presents 0  to open  . 
gift means 0 a family will have a holiday meal , cooking utensils 0  to prepare the meal  and dishes 0  to serve it on  . 
Your gift will go beyond the holiday season . 
It can help  purchase clothing , school supplies , books and educational tools throughout the year . 
Please  take a few minutes  to mail a donation to Pleasant run . 
 Let our families and children know that you want them to have the same kinds of memories of the holidays 0 you will have  . 
We wish you and your family a new year full of joy and love . 
 
It  's hard  to believe that the holiday season is only two months away . 
At Pleasant Run , Inc. we are making plans and arrangements for our children and families . 
Every year we seek companies , organizations and individuals 0  to sponsor one or more of our families . 
These families are participants in our community - based programs . 
These programs focus on  keeping the family together by  providing counseling and other services to the entire family . 
After our caseworkers meet with these families and their children they often find 0 they lack even the basic necessities such as cooking utensils , beds , cleaning supplies , etc . 
We meet these needs immediately . 
But , the holiday season is a particularly difficult time for these families . 
They do not have the resources necessary  to purchase gifts or food for a holiday meal . 
We are asking you  to consider  sponsoring one of our families for this holiday season . 
If you are interested and would like more information , please  contact Lisa Lusk or Marcia Whited at 693-9222 . 
We would like  to have families matched * with sponsors no later than xxxx . 
 Thank you for  considering this opportunity  to make this a memorable holiday season for a family in need . 
 
June 1 , 1998 
& Girls Club   
Dear Friend , 
It 's summertime , so it must be time for   
Yes , it 's that time of the year -- the start of the Boys & Girls clubs of Indianapolis ' Camp . 
Six weeks of learning and exploring , sports , arts , and fellowship . 
time for a youngster to enjoy the fun and benefits of residential camp living , dedicated staff and instruction , and a chance  to make special friends . 
I know 0 you 're committed * to  ensuring 0 today 's children have safe , healthy , and positive summer experiences . 
That 's why I want you to learn more about the Super Summer Safari Camp  . 
At Super Summer Safari Camp , there are daily sports , nature , and arts activities . 
In addition to the fun stuff , important life-skills such as self-esteem , leadership , and interpersonal cooperation are being developed  . 
Please  read the enclosed brochure for more information on the wonderful Super Summer Safari Camp  
It  costs $ 225   to send one child to camp . 
Many members of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Indianapolis ca n't afford  to go to camp without financial assistance , and that 's why we need you   
Please  make camp possible for all deserving Indianapolis children and send in a tax deductible contribution today in the enclosed envelope . 
 Consider  sponsoring 1 , 2 , or 3 children . 
No matter the size of the donation , please  know that your gift will be appreciated  and make a difference . 
Sincerely , Richard Dickinson 
 
You can make a difference in a child 's life . 
 
February 26 , 1999 
Dear , 
Kids today face overwhelming pressures , everything from trouble at home to gangs and drugs . 
Youngsters often find themselves  feeling alienated and alone . 
That 's where the Boys & Girls Clubs of Indianapolis come in  . 
We reach out to kids -- especially those from disadvantaged neighborhoods where the risks are highest  . 
We give them a chance  to realize their own potential by  giving them a place where they can develop a sense of competence , of usefulness , a sense of belonging and of influence  . 
 To accomplish this , the five area Boys & Girls Clubs of Indianapolis must be open and available when the kids need them  , with the staff and programs 0 the kids need   to reach and grow into responsible and caring citizens . 
This costs money . 
Money for programs , for equipment , and for repairs and improvements to club facilities . 
Your contribution last year of helped us get where we are today  . 
We are counting on you now  to help us get where we need  to be  tomorrow . 
Would you please consider a gift of the same in 1999 ? 
Please ,  give generously . 
The kids are depending on you . 
Respectfully , James Campbell President of the Board Deputy Chief , Indianapolis Police Department 
 United Way Agency 
 
Come one  , Come all  to the Inaugural Jameson Grill The only fund raising event in the world where you can bring your entire family , other employees , or maybe even your neighbors  . 
Saturday , September 2, 1997 , from 2:00 p. m. until 7:00 p. m, marks a special day , as Jameson Camp will hold its first ever Jameson Grill . 
fund raiser dedicated * to you and your family having fun ! 
For this event , when you purchase a corporate picnic table  , you will be able  to bring 16 people . 
 and if you need room for a couple of more , we can swing that too   
The Grill will feature enough activities that you and your kids will have a tough time  deciding what  to do  . 
From basketball , kickball , volleyball , archery , crafts , an egg toss , and even a walk through our creek , you will have plenty 0  to do   to get you good and hungry . 
 Hungry , you bet  
We 'll prepare a hog roast and hot dogs for the kids , with all the fixings . 
In addition , we will have soft drinks and a raffle , so that you can walk home with a great prize  
The Jameson Grill has been designed   to be nothing but fun for you , your family , employees , and maybe even your neighbors . 
 Join in this wonderful event and help Jameson Camp continue  to provide the year-round support that  gives kids a chance  to create dreams . 
Simply  fill out the enclosed card , and we will see you at the Grill  
One of our volunteers will be contacting you soon . 
Questions ? 
 
July 11 , 1997 
Name Address City , State Zip 
Dear Mr. / Mrs. Name  
We need your help in  continuing the work of Jameson Camp . 
Jameson is a not-for-profit agency established * in 1928  to serve the youth of central Indiana who  have special needs . 
The camp offers summer residential programs for children from ages 7 - 17 , and continues contact with the campers and their families with special overnight and weekend follow-up events during the school year . 
All children who  attend the camp are referred  by social workers , doctors , teachers , counselors , and other professionals . 
Many of the children have learning disabilities , behavioral problems , or come from economically distressed families . 
The goal of our organized camping experience is  to improve the total health of the children socially , emotionally , and physically . 
This year Jameson Camp is planning an Inaugural fund - raising event : The Jameson Grill  
This event is designed   to be fun for campers , their families , friends of the camp , neighbors , staff , and anyone interested in  finding out more about Jameson . 
In short , Fun for Everyone  
The family - friendly event , September 20 , 1997 , will include a hog roast , activities for kids and adults , prizes for activities , and a small raffle . 
Lucky attendees can go home with a great prize . 
This is where we need your help  . 
Can you help  support this wonderful event by  furnishing any type of products or services that  can be used  as prizes for our activities or as a raffle prize ? 
Your contribution will help with funding so Jameson Camp can continue  providing the year-round camping experience that  gives kids a chance  to create dreams . 
Enclosed  is a form 0 you can complete  and return  to us in the postage - paid envelope . 
Or , you can fax us at 241-2760 , or e-mail , icfundrzr@aol.com . 
Your quick response will help us begin  organizing our prizes . 
After we receive your commitment , we will contact you about  picking up your contribution . 
If you have any questions , please  call me at 241-2661 . 
We appreciate your support of our first event of this type . 
Sincerely , Pat Bray Director of Development 
 Help  Blaze The Trail 
-- 1997 Jameson Camp 
 
July 25 , 1997 
Dear Name , 
What a Summer  
And we 're just getting  started  
I hope 0 you 'll consider  continuing your support of Jameson 's special campers by  renewing your last gift of $ xxx  . 
I can tell you 0 we need your help now as much as ever before . 
All of our Six summer camping sessions are booked  to capacity  and , truth be told  , with maybe one our two extra returning campers squeezed  in  and we have a waiting list of 60 children who  are hoping  to come if a spot should open . 
Many more camper referrals are coming from new organizations such as school social-workers and family counseling agencies . 
It seems 0 summer options are n't readily available for troubled kids whose families  have limited incomes , so we 're doing all 0 we can *?*   to make Jameson available . 
That " we " includes the Youth Leadership teens . 
These 60 or so campers have taken on a fund raiser with a goal of  raising $ 16,000  for camperships . 
Two of them told me yesterday that as a group they decided 0 they had  to earn the right  to ask others for help by  accomplishing something real  to help themselves . 
And that 's from kids 0 many people see  as a problem . 
Even after the summer sessions come to a close , Jameson campers will take part in year-round programs designed *  to keep that positive contact with peers and role models  alive and important . 
We 've scheduled more than 15 follow-up camper weekends beginning in September and going around till next summer 's camping season . 
Please ,  consider  renewing your support of these great kids today . 
Sincerely , Julie Marsh Executive Director 
 
We know 0 our follow-up weekends are going  to be better attended than ever this fall and winter . 
 
June 10 , 1997 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Mrs. Name , 
Confidence . 
An understanding that , above anything else , success requires genuine effort , a willingness  to set challenging goals . 
 Caring about others . 
These are the attributes 0 we want all children to have  . 
You help Jameson campers reach for them . 
If these special children are  to become the adults 0 we all need them to be  , we have  to lead them in the right direction right now . 
Jameson points the way for children who  need that extra hand and I hope 0 you 'll continue your support this year . 
Your last gift of $ 50.00  helped  make it  possible for us to provide guidance , encouragement and fun to nearly 400 Indianapolis area children . 
And not just during the summer , but throughout the year . 
What has your support of our campers meant  to them and what have they been able  to accomplish  because you care ? 
The best indicator 0 I can give you  of the positive effect 0 our year-round contact has  is the growth in  and deeds of  the Youth Leadership teens . 
In just the past few years this program has grown from a few kids and a few extra activities to a team of almost 60 young adults taking on real projects . 
teens will make juniors happen again this year for 7 and 8 year old campers . 
  five day camp , juniors introduces at-risk children to Jameson two years earlier than we could previously reach them . 
That means 0 we now have the opportunity  to be a stable , positive and important part of each child 's life for an entire decade . 
The teens have also decided  to raise money  to provide camperships for other campers because they know what Jameson has meant  to them . 
And their activities are n't isolated to Jameson . 
The teens have undertaken a volunteer project  to regularly visit with sick children at a local hospital . 
Please  consider  renewing your gift today . 
The kids need your leadership now more than ever . 
If you can increase your last donation , we would appreciate that show of support for the campers and their efforts  to overcome obstacles and create successful lives . 
 Thank you again for  helping  point the way . 
Sincerely , Julie Marsh , Executive Director 
 
You make it  possible for us to help special kids with learning disabilities , behavior problems and economic disadvantages to gain the confidence required *  to put genuine effort into  achieving real goals . 
 
July 30 , 1999 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Mr. Ratcliff  
 is a federation of 13 neighborhood - based multi-service centers whose mission  is  to identify and meet the human service needs of residents throughout Marion County in the most effective , efficient and comprehensive way possible . 
In 1998 , we served a total of 31,484 low-income individuals through job training and placement assistance , youth and senior programming , family counseling , emergency assistance , and much more . 
As you can see *?* from the enclosed map , your Target store is located  in the heart of four of our service areas . 
The centers that  serve these areas , Mary Rigg Neighborhood Center , Hawthorne Community Center , Southwest Multi-Service Center , and Christamore House , have teamed up  to run an exciting job readiness program for 14 and 15 year old area residents called *  the Summer Enrichment Program . 
Between June 21 and August 31 , 45 youth will spend 20 hours a week  developing life management and work ethic skills , learning the computer , visiting area colleges , and interacting with guest speakers . 
The end result will be kids who  have a better understanding of  and vision for  their own future , be it college or a career . 
The Summer Enrichment Program will conclude with a celebration that  includes family and friends . 
We would like  to offer our youth a small reward for their participation by  presenting them with gift certificates from Target . 
Therefore , we are asking you  to donate 45 , $ 10  gift certificates that  can be used  toward the purchase of school supplies or clothing , in the total amount of $ 450  . 
In return , we will recognize Target as a sponsor during our event and in the event program . 
Target is well known  for its support of the community , and we believe that the Summer Enrichment Program represents your interests and concerns quite well . 
I will be happy  to supply any additional information 0 you may need  and thank you for your consideration of our request . 
We look forward to  hearing from you . 
 
     ,   
March 4 , 1999 
Dear  
 has come a long way in the last five years . 
We 've worked hard  to structrue the organization so that we 're ready  to move boldly into the next century , and I believe that we have an exciting and successful future ahead of us . 
One of the areas 0 we 've decided  to focus on  is development . 
It  's clear that if we do n't increase our base of private funding , we wo n't have the kind of control 0 we need   to ensure the continued success of our centers and the very important services 0 they offer  . 
In 1998 ,  served 31,484 individuals right in their own backyards . 
Where else would that many people turn  if  were n't there  to help ? 
The community initiatives committee is working with our development office  to put together a long-range fundraising plan that  will ultimately bring more money into our centers . 
This in turn will help us to increase  and even improve  the services 0 we offer  . 
With this in mind , I am asking each one of you  to make a personal contribution of $ 50  , $ 100  or even $ 1,000   to show that you believe in the work that we do  and are willing  to support it with both your time and your finances . 
This way when we go out  to ask for community support and are asked  about our board giving level  , we can show our in-house commitment through 100 % board participation . 
I also encourage you  to seek additional support through your company , church , or service organization . 
I know that our staff and committee members will be happy  to go with you  to talk to these group if you need their help . 
We 're at an exciting juncture and it wo n't be long until we start  seeing solid results from our efforts . 
Your financial support of the development process is just one step in  making  a stronger , more efficient and ultimately more effective federation of service providers . 
Please ,  make your contribution today . 
Sincerely , Chris Graffeo Chair 
 
 
July 30 , 1999 
Dear Name  
Question What do you get  in 987,165 hours with 291 people in 15 locations ? 
Answer 34,700 opportunities  to change a life  
This is exactly what  happened in 1997 when Community Centers of Indianapolis provided its comprehensive , neighborhood - based services to individuals and families all over Marion County  . 
And we can do even more in 1999 with your financial support  
Just  look at the range of services 0 we offer  : 70,0001 career assistance for youth Preschool for young children School Age Child Care for and children and youth Access services such as emergency and holiday assistance for all ages Adult Day Care for seniors Senior Case Management Aids Education for youth and adults Senior Social Involvement Computer Training for youth , adults and seniors Senior Nutrition meal program Day Care for young children Social Development and Recreation for children , youth and adults , .   Home Instructional Program for Preschool Youngsters  for families , . Stopover crises counseling for youth , . In Home Services for adults and seniors , . Transportation for youth and seniors 
 is a federation of 13 neighborhood - based multi-service centers  plus one affiliate  whose mission  is  to identify and meet the human service needs of the greater Indianapolis community in the most effective , efficient and comprehensive way possible . 
Better yet , most of these services occur in cooperation with private and public agencies from all over the city : -  The Access Network , Goodwill Industries , Indianapolis Housing Agency , City of Indianapolis , Indianapolis Private Industry Council , Family and Social Services administration ,  , Indy Parks , and numerous community development corporations , neighborhood organizations , and churches ,  to name just a few . 
More than 34,000 people benefited from our services in 1997 , and the final count for 1998 could be even higher . 
We 're asking for a contribution in the amount of because you ca n't get a better bang for your buck than  to support an organization that  impacts so many lives in so many ways . 
Your gift will enable  to provide these and other necessary services at a neighborhood level  , face - to - face , where it counts  . 
Please ,  make a tax deductible gift to Community Centers of Indianapolis in 1999 , and know that  is playing an important part in  meeting the needs of its community . 
If you have any questions , please  feel free  to give us a call at 638-3360 . 
We thank you for your consideration , and look forward to  hearing from you . 
 
August 4 , 1999 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
The goal of , Inc. has been  to make a difference . 
In 1998 , , Inc. led two efforts that ,  we believe , will help our community continue  to take the steps necessary  to help all young people grow up and develop well . 
Participants in the Youth Outcomes Educational Initiative identified three goals 0 for all our youth to obtain  : economic self-sufficiency , healthy family , social relationships , and involvement in the community . 
short time later , the Community Youth Mapping Project sent 55 young people out into the community  to identify the resources 0 they need   to grow up well : caring adults , safe places 0  to go  , and positive things 0  to do  . 
One group of adults and one group of youth , through two very different processes , have arrived at the same conclusion : ; our community still has much 0  to do  if we are  to help  of your youth successfully develop into the responsible , productive adults who  will our community in the future . 
As a provider of youth services , , Inc. is here  to support your valuable efforts  to develop young people . 
Recently , through a lot of hard work and alliances with organizations like yours , some steps  have been taken  in our community that  will help young people continue  to be involved  in positive activities . 
One , IndyGo in April adopted a much - needed policy that all young people under the age of 19 may ride on their buses at half the normal fare all year long . 
Two , funding  was made  available this summer for youth organizations and churches to conduct positive youth programming on Saturday evenings . 
Through the youth mapping process , it  was confirmed  that the positive opportunities for youth on weekend evenings were lacking . 
That need is being met  . 
As it has been an exciting year for all of us , , Inc. can not do its part without the support of organizations like yours . 
Annually , we ask several of our youth serving organizations  to join us in our effort  to help young people grow up well in Indianapolis . 
Enclosed  is  a donation card that  will enable you to make Indianapolis a great place for  of us to live . 
If you have any questions or concerns at any time , please  do not hesitate   to call me at 921-1288 . 
 
January 5 , 1997 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Bill : 
This is the time of year when our thoughts turn to ways 0  to do things differently  , things that  will make our lives better and improve the quality of our life  . 
As you begin that process this year , I would like  to ask you  to consider  helping young people in Marion County toward more positive youth development by  becoming a supporter of the Marion County Commission on Youth , Inc. 
Inc, originally founded * as a government agency but re-organized in 1993 as an independent not-for-profit , is a county - wide youth services coordinating , planning , and convening agency . 
Its purpose is  to encourage collaboration and cooperation between the various agencies , programs , and systems that  serve our community 's youth . 
In addition to that behind-the-scenes role ,  has taken an out-front role in  developing a Summer Bus Pass , neighborhood youth councils , and the We Value Youth information line . 
It  is our goal that every young person in Marion County have access to the programs and services that  can best assist them in their growth toward a positive adulthood . 
I am hopeful that you as an individual and Meridian Insurance as a corporation might consider  becoming sustaining supporters of  . 
I have enclosed a packet of information about  and its work as well as an application with various options for  supporting the youth of our community . 
I obviously ca n't tell the whole story of  in a single letter but I hope 0 this provides an overview of the scope of our work . 
I will call you in a few weeks  to discuss your level of interest . 
Please  consider  joining together with your fellow citizens in support of the work of the Marion County Commission on Youth . 
 
October 7 , 1996 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Name  
In the summer of 1993 , the Marion County Commission on Youth began what  can best be described  as a " new era " in its history . 
 was reorganized  as an independent , not-for-profit agency , separate from local government . 
It retained , however , the same mission with which it had been charged   from its inception :  to serve as a catalyst for effective , coordinated , and collaborative service delivery to youth in our community . 
For the past three years ,  has been actively engaged  in  accomplishing this declared mission in cooperation with many others : youth service providers , youth , funding bodies , and interested citizens  to name a few . 
We have met with a number of successes  along the way , most notably the Summer Fun Line , the Metro Summer Bus Pass , and the development of ten neighborhood youth councils . 
Providers Council and a Youth Coalition are building relationships that  will hopefully bear great fruit in the years 0  to come . 
The formation of The Community Academy , a pilot project directed * at expelled students from local school systems , has come about as a result of 's efforts  to mobilize community agencies in response to a pressing issue . 
McCoy is actively represented  and working with numerous community collaborations where we regularly raise our voice  to speak out for the inclusion of young people in both decision-making and program planning processes  . 
One concrete example is a joint project undertaken * in the United Northwest Area in partnership with The Junior League of Indianapolis and Community Partnerships with Youth from Fort Wayne , Indiana . 
As a team , these three organizations are working with neighborhood youth and adults  to build a " Caring Neighborhood with Youth " ,  mobilizing the assets of young people and adults as partners  to build a better neighborhood for all . 
Since its re-organization ,  has established its unique niche within the community by  refraining from direct service programming and focusing on what it does  best :  helping  to identify youth needs , convening groups of individuals and organizations which  can address those needs , and moving toward collaborative solutions . 
McCoy has only one interest : the well being of Marion County 's young people . 
McCoy invites the support of The __ Company Foundation in the amount of $ 10,000.00  0  to support such activities as : ---- the co-ordination of youth leadership training and youth empowerment efforts at the neighborhood level by means of neighborhood - based youth councils : ; ---- the promotion of youth employment opportunities : ; ---- the facilitation of ongoing discussions regarding effective and efficient youth service delivery : ; ---- the provision of technical assistance and guidance to neighborhoods which  seek positive youth - adult relationships : ; ---- the development of community - wide supports for the positive growth of all Marion County young people . 
In the last several years , the business and corporate community has recognized that the positive development of youth is directly related  to the development of a competent workforce . 
Youth who  are supported and encouraged  by both a family and a society that  values Them have a much greater likelihood of  becoming productive and contributing members of adult society . 
While we have made significant inroads , there remains much 0  to be done  and it  is clear that we can not do it alone . 
We seek the financial support of the Foundation  to help us be successful in  creating the atmosphere in our community where young people can grow and develop well  . 
Your contribution will enable us to both continue and expand the good work 0 we have begun  in  making Indianapolis a city famous for its commitment to youth and families . 
In our fund raising efforts to date , we have received the support of local government , foundations , and corporations as well as the personal financial commitments of individual Board members . 
We believe 0 there is no more appropriate time 0  to have a coordinated and collaborative effort  to financially support the services 0  offers  to the community as a whole  . 
 
July 28 , 1999 
Dear 
 Join us for the " Sale of the Century " at Auction '99 , on Saturday , November 13 , 1999 . 
The 9th annual Auction will benefit the numerous scholarship programs of the Jewish Community Center of Indianapolis , a United Way agency . 
Because you are an organization that  cares , you are invited   to become an integral part of this fabulous event by  becoming a corporate sponsor for Auction '99 . 
The would be very pleased  to welcome your organization as a corporate sponsor . 
We are seeking  to build partnerships between businesses and our not-for-profit agency . 
As a sponsor , you and your guests will have a special evening ,  knowing that your tax deductible contribution will help  support preschool , childcare , senior and resettlement services , as well as quality cultural events in our community . 
Enclosed  is  a corporate sponsorship package that  includes a sample auction book from last year 's event , market statistics and an overview of the many programs that  will be preserved and strengthened  through your generous support . 
One of us will call you  to discuss how your company can become an important highly visible partner with the in support of our scholarship programs  . 
If you have any questions , please  feel free  to call Myrna Weinberger at 251-9467 , ext. 256 . 
 Thank you in advance for your consideration . 
 
October 27  , 1998 
Dear Name      ( 
 Join us for the " Sale of the Century " at Auction '99 , on Saturday     , November 13     , 1999 . 
The 9th annual Auction will benefit the numerous scholarship programs of the Jewish Community Center of Indianapolis , a United Way agency     . 
Because you are an organization that  cares     , you are invited  once again  to be an integral part of this fabulous event as a corporate sponsor for Auction '99     . 
We are so grateful for your generous contribution to last year 's auction     . 
Your continued participation is very important to the , as we work  to build partnerships between businesses and our not-for-profit agency     . 
As a sponsor     , you and your guests will have a special evening     ,  knowing that your tax deductible contribution will help  support preschool , childcare , senior and resettlement services    , as well as quality cultural events in our community     . 
Enclosed  is  a corporate sponsorship package that  includes a sample of your ad from last year 's auction book  , current market statistics and an overview of the many programs that  will be preserved and strengthened  through your generous support . 
One of us will call you  to discuss how your company can continue  to be an important    , highly visible partner with the in support of our scholarship programs      . 
If you have any questions , please  feel free  to call Myrna Weinberger at 251-9467      , ext. 256 . 
 Thank you in advance for your consideration     . 

Name Address City , State , Zip 
Dear Name , 
It  's tough  growing up today . 
We know that children do better when they have a network of caring adults 0  to nurture and motivate them  . 
When young people do n't have that support  , they need other resources for encouragement 0  to guide them along the way . 
Big Sisters helps  bridge that gap by  providing children with the resources 0 they need  -- Big Sisters volunteers . 
Big Sisters are mentors and friends who  empower girls  to more fully reach their potential , experience life 's opportunities and perhaps begin  to dream . 
The relationships that  are formed  provide strong foundations from which healthy values and strong self-confidence can grow  ,  helping youth become strong , independent adults of tomorrow . 
This year we will serve over 1,000 girls through our mentoring programs . 
This is an impressive number : ; 
but for each girl served * , more are left   unserved . 
Over 150 girls are currently waiting for a Big Sister . 
You can make an impact by  supporting Big Sisters Annual Campaign and our $ 200,000  goal . 
If you are a regular contributor to the Annual Campaign , I encourage you  to consider  increasing your gift by 10 % . 
If you have not supported Big Sisters in the past , please  join me in  doing so by  completing and returning the enclosed pledge form . 
Early adolescence is the most vulnerable age for youth . 
But caring adults like you can reach out and help . 
It 's the perfect time 0  to make a world of difference  . 
 
August 6 , 1998 
Dear Friend  
Adolescence . 
It is a pivotal time in the life of a young girl : - when small changes in her behavior , or the choices 0 she makes  , can affect her future  . 
It  's hard enough for her to make good decisions when she 's surrounded  by support  . 
It 's even harder when she is n't *?*  . 
Big Sisters helps  fill that void by  matching caring , responsible adult volunteers with at-risk girls , ages 8 - 14 . 
Big Sister is a mentor , a friend and a role model ,  helping a young girl to develop the self-confidence and life skills necessary  to become a responsible , productive and successful adult . 
Your $ 1,000  contribution can put a mentor in a child 's life : - and hope in a child 's future . 
The results of an 18 - month study completed * by Public / Private Ventures showed that children participating in one - to - one Big Sister and Big Brother matches for just one year , reduced first time drug use by 46 % : ; lowered school absenteeism by 52 % : ; cut aggressive behavior by 33 % : ; enhanced school performance : ; and improved relations with family and friends . 
This is positive proof that Big Sisters one - to - one mentoring program helps  change lives . 
Today , we are offering you the opportunity  to help  change a life . 
By  contributing $ 1,000  you can support one match for one year . 
This money maintains the infrastructure that  fosters and supports the development of effective relationships . 
This includes a volunteer screening process , orientation , training and ongoing supervision and support by a professional staff . 
As a Matchmaker you will receive a description of " your match " and be identified  as a Matchmaker on a plaque in the Big Sisters office , in the agency newsletter and annual report . 
Today Big Sisters serves over 1,000 girls in central Indiana . 
But for each girl served * , more are left   unserved . 
Over 235 girls are currently waiting for a Big Sister . 
 Imagine the difference 0 the community could make  if each congregation pledged its support of one Big Sisters match  
I encourage you  to Join me in  presenting this matchmaker challenge to your congregation . 
 
August 10 , 1999 
Mr. Caring Philanthropy 01234 Giving Way Contribution ,  56789 
Dear Mr. Philanthropy , 
" The urgency  0 you feel   to make changes is just the extent that change will be made   . 
 Do not sit this one out . 
 Do not play it  safe . 
 Understand the world and change it where it needs  to be changed   ... 
 Make our society better . 
 Make a world worthy of the children that your generation will bear  . " 
-- Carl Sagan 
You can help  make positive changes in the lives of at-risk youth in central Indiana . 
We often hear about economic poverty , but what some of these young people are growing up with  is emotional poverty : - they have often given up on hope and the possibility of a successful future . 
With your help , we can change that . 
Many Little Sisters are preparing  to go back to school this fall  full of hope and with a positive outlook . 
Thanks to our Big Sisters volunteers , these young people are self - confident , believe in themselves and are beginning  to realize their full potential . 
recent study by Public / Private Ventures    showed that girls who  had a Big Sister for just one year : reduced first - time drug use by 46 % lowered school absenteeism by 52 % cut violent behavior by 33 % enhanced school performance showed improved peer and family relationships 
Former Little Sister Amy , now 18 - years old , is a testament to the Big Sisters program . 
" I was matched  with my Big Sister in June of 1992 . 
Since then , she and I have grown very close and I have been able  to experience lots of new things . 
We go to movies , dinner , concerts , and other stuff like that , but I have also been able  to participate in charity events and fundraiser type things . 
Not only did I have a lot of fun with my Big Sister , but I learned a lot from her too . 
I have become more open-minded , more responsible , and , most importantly , I have gained a lot more self-confidence . 
I am very thankful to the Big Sisters program for  allowing me this very special opportunity . 
In 1998 , Big Sisters served 972 young people through its many programs . 
But the need is still great . 
Over 170 young people are still waiting for a mentor . 
You are an important part in  making   sure 0 these young people are matched  with caring adult mentors . 
Will you make a financial gift to Big Sisters  in 1999 that  will ensure that more young people receive the guidance 0 they need  , that more young people stay in school , stay off drugs and make good choices ? 
Your contribution will be used   to recruit and retain quality volunteers . 
It will also be used   to help  maintain the infrastructure that  fosters and supports the development of effective relationships , including volunteer orientation and training and ongoing supervision and support by a professional staff . 
This year your gift can go farther  
Gifts of $ 100  or more will be matched  thanks to a special 25th Anniversary $ 100,000  Challenge Grant and will be placed  in the Growth For Girls Fund . 
This fund will support the goal of  having 550 mentoring relationships by the end of 1999 and 1,200 by the end of 2004 . 
If you would like  to find out more about the Big Sisters program , please  call us , 317 634-6102 and ask for Ellen Robinson . 
 Thank you very much for your time , attention and consideration . 
Sincerely , Andrew Burns Patron Relations Chairperson 
 
When you give to Big Sisters  , you can get 50 % back  
For a minimum contribution of $ 250  , you become eligible for a 50 % Indiana state tax credit through the Indiana Department of Commerce Neighborhood Assistance Program    . 
limited number of credits are available . 
 
March 29 , 1999 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Name  
The 1999  Invest in Youth Campaign is in full swing . 
As a former board member , the success of the is still important to me . 
We must be able  to reach all youth and families interested * in values - based programs . 
The  Invest in Youth campaign helps  insure this . 
New initiatives in the inner - city are taking hold . 
The Urban Mission Branch is reaching out to middle school youth with programs based * on caring , honesty , respect and responsibility for themselves and others . 
For some , these are very different messages from the ones heard * in the street . 
They are learning  to make positive choices concerning alcohol , tobacco and other drugs and to support each other when those choices are challenged   . 
You have shared in the vision and the leadership of the of Greater Indianapolis . 
I now invite you  to continue  to support the mission and the message that  is so important to  building strong kids , strong families and strong communities . 
Please  consider  joining the Chairman 's Roundtable with a gift of $ 1,000  . 
I have enclosed a pledge card for your convenience . 
We would like  to announce the success of this year 's campaign at the Annual Meeting on April 27 , so please  return your pledge or gift within the next 30 days . 
 Thank you . 

Iraq clears visit by Ohio official 
By Scott Montgomery 
Washington 
 
The Iraqi government has agreed  to let  Rep. Tony Hall visit the country next week  to assess a humanitarian crisis that  has festered since the Gulf War of 1990 , Hall 's office said 0  Monday . 
The Dayton Democrat , who  has traveled to other crisis points including Sierra Leone and North Korea , will spend three days  visiting hospitals and other facilities  to seek understanding why aid has been ineffective in  stemming malnourishment and other medical problems  . 
Iraq has been under economic sanctions  since the war ended , which some say 0  have thwarted the country 's ability  to recover from the devastation of the bombing campaign . 
The Persian Gulf War destroyed much of the country 's medical infrastructure , according to a report by the World Health Organization . 
In 1996 the found that much of the population existed in a state of semi starvation . 
Hall will be only the second member of Congress 0  to travel in Iraq since the war , according to Hall 's office . 
The last visitor was then -  Rep. Bill Richardson of New Mexico , who  went  to help a pair of  oilmen in diplomatic trouble . 
 
Hall flies to Amman , Jordan  , on Friday , where he 'll spend the night before  driving to Iraq  . 
Flights are not permitted  into Iraq . 
Hall is  to return to Washington on April 22 . 
 
Ohio Congressman Arrives in Jordan 
 
 , Jordan    
 Representative Tony Hall arrived in Jordan on Saturday en route to Iraq , where he is expected  to look into the plight of Iraqis after nearly 10 years of  trade sanctions  . 
Hall , an Ohio Democrat and one of very few  congressmen 0  to visit Iraq since the 1991 Gulf War over Kuwait , is scheduled   to embark Sunday the 12 - hour overland trip to the Iraqi capital , Baghdad . 
He did not speak to reporters in Jordan , but he told The Associated Press before  leaving the United States that he hopes  to " separate the humanitarian work from the political issues . " 
During his four days in Iraq , Hall said 0 he wanted  to investigate reports  from relief agencies that a quarter of Iraqi children may be suffering from chronic malnutrition . 
He said 0 he would pay particular attention to what  happens to food and medicine entering the country under the  oil - for - food program . 
If supplies are not reaching the people who  need them , Hall said 0 *?* , he wanted  to find out whether the United Nations or relief agencies needed  to handle things differently , or whether " Iraq needs  to get out of the way and let us do the job . " 
 
The Iraqi government blames the embargo for the malnutrition , infant mortality and other hardships . 
The sanctions can not be lifted  until  inspectors certify that Iraq has eliminated its weapons of mass destruction and the means 0  to produce them  . 
Iraq says 0 it has done so and has barred inspectors since late 1998 . 
At least one other congressman has visited Iraq . 
 
Lawmaker Appeals for Innocent Iraqis 
By  , Associated Press Writer 
 
 , Iraq    
  lawmaker assessing the impact of  sanctions on Iraq said Wednesday 0 it  is important  not only to force Baghdad  to give up its weapons of mass destruction but also to do more  to ease the hardships on ordinary Iraqis . 
Rep. Tony Hall ,  - Ohio , did not call for a lifting of sanctions imposed * on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait , but said 0 the United Nations should make   sure that sanctions do not hurt innocent Iraqis . 
" It  was very , very important "  to compel Iraq  to rid itself of weapons of mass destruction so that " it can not use *?* or export them to other countries , " he told Associated Press Television News  . 
But he insisted 0 the international community can do a much better job in  helping Iraq deal with its economic and health problems . 
One way would be  to speed up the flow of health supplies and other urgent commodities to the country under a  humanitarian program , he said 0  . 
 
Iraq says 0 the United States and Britain hold up delivery of needed supplies ,  using their clout in the United Nations . 
 
- 
Washington 
 
Rep. Tony Hall ,  - Ohio , urges the United Nations  to allow a freer flow of food and medicine into Iraq . 
Hall , who  recently returned from a trip to Iraq , said 0  economic sanctions have hurt millions of civilians there . 
By  . 
 
 
Iraq Lodges Protest  with United Nations Concerning British and American Raids 
Baghdad 8 - 15    . - 
Iraq protested strongly to the United Nations against American and British air raids which  targeted civilian installations in southern Iraq ,  killing two people and injuring 23 others according to a report by the official Iraqi news agency today , Tuesday . 
According to Baghdad , two civilians were killed  and 23 others injured  during two attacks by American and British planes on Friday and Saturday against civilian installations in the town of Samawa in southern Iraq . 
Al-Sahaf added : " These two regimes are directly involved  in the attack against Iraq through their support of air raids by American and British planes and by  allowing these planes to fly from air bases in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait . " 
Aziz said : " The continuous falsehoods spread * by Kuwait 's rulers are aimed  at  manufacturing an artificial crisis  to give the Americans and British a pretext  to continue their attacks on Iraq and keep the sanctions against its people in place . " 
Since late 1998 , almost daily skirmishes have taken place between Iraq and American and British planes patrolling the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq . 
Baghdad does not recognize these no-fly zones for which no international resolution has been passed   . 
According to a count prepared * by Agence France Press , based * on official Iraqi statements , American and British raids inside Iraq have resulted in 302 deaths and 900 injuries since 1998 . 
 
 
June 6 , 2000 
Name Address City ,  Zip 
Dear Name : Pat LaCrosse asked me  to send this information inviting you  to join the Georgia O'Keeffe Circle of the Indianapolis Museum of Art 's Second Century Society    . 
The brochure 0 I am enclosing  will give you the historic significance of  , as well as listing activities and specific benefits awarded * to donors at the Georgia O'Keeffe level . 
Your Georgia O'Keeffe membership , please  note , includes free admission to all art - related activities of the 's Young Friends of Art group . 
Additionally , I am sending traditional background materials on the Museum and the two latest issues of our Previews Magazine detailing upcoming events , exhibitions , and educational programs . 
These are particularly exciting times at the Indianapolis Museum of Art : Progress continues on the Lilly estate : - Oldfields , our Ravine Garden has been restored  to its original splendor , and there is national attention showered * on our current exhibition of Japanese Painting . 
 please  see The New York Times article 0 I have included  .  
With thousands of trees and flowers in bloom , we are having a beautiful Spring  
Our extraordinary permanent collection , facility , and grounds , we understand full well 0 *?* , would not be possible without the philanthropic support of civic-minded men and women . 
In  joining  , you join the ranks of those who  believe that  bringing art and art education to the city makes life better , richer , and more rewarding for the entire community . 
 Second Century Society response card and return envelope are enclosed  . 
Should you have questions or if I can be of assistance in any way , please  call me : 317.923.1331 , ext. 248 . 
Sincerely ,  Donor Relations Coordinator 
Enclosures . / 
 
Both our Barefoot in the Grass family picnic  July 23 2000  and the annual  Founders Day celebration  October 11 2000  are free for Georgia 'Keeffe members . 
 Mark your calendars  
 
<DOC_docid="artb_004"_sysid="ahd"> 
<hl> 
<seg_id=1> 
Inauguration of free zone in Dubai for e-commerce 
</seg> 
</hl> 
<p> 
<seg_id=2> 
Dubai 10 - 28    . - 
Dubai 's Crown Prince Sheikh Mohamed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum inaugurated a free zone for e-commerce  today , called *  Dubai Internet City . 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=3> 
The preliminary stages of the project , the only one of its kind according to its designers , are estimated  at $ 200 million  . 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
<p> 
<seg_id=4> 
Sheikh Mohamed , who  is also the Defense Minister of the United Arab Emirates , announced at the inauguration ceremony that " we want  to make Dubai a new trading center . " 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=5> 
The minister , who  has his own website , also said : " I want Dubai to be the best place in the world for state - of - the - art technology companies . " 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=6> 
He said 0 companies engaged * in e-commerce  would be able  to set up offices , employ staff and own equipment in the open zone , including fully : - owned foreign companies . 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
<p> 
<seg_id=7> 
The e-commerce free zone is situated  in north Dubai , near the industrial free zone in Jebel Ali , the top regional  and tenth international  leading area in container transit . 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=8> 
The inauguration of Dubai Internet City coincides with the opening of an annual show in Dubai , the Gulf Information Technology Exhibition  Gitex  , the biggest in the Middle East . 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
<DOC_docid="artb_004"_sysid="ahg"> 
<hl> 
<seg_id=1> 
 Launching the Electronics Free Trade Zone in Dubai 
</seg> 
</hl> 
<p> 
<seg_id=2> 
Dubai 01 - 82    . - 
Crown Prince of Dubai Al Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoom crown prince of Dubai launched today , i.e. on Saturday , an electronics free e-trade zone which  has been named  "  Dubai Internet City " 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=3> 
The cost in the first stage of this unique project is estimated  at 200 million dollars . 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
<p> 
<seg_id=4> 
Sheikh Mohammed , who  is also the Defence Minister , said during the launching ceremony " we wish  to make Dubai a center of modern economy " . 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=5> 
The minister who  has a personal website on the internet , further said that he wanted Dubai to become the best place in the world for the advanced hitech technological companies . 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=6> 
He said that it  would be possible for the companies working in the electronic trade sector to make Dubai their headquarters , and to establish offices here and provide employment and own machinery in the zone opened * to companies fully owned * by the foreigners . 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
<p> 
<seg_id=7> 
The electronic trade free trade zone is situated  in the north of Dubai , close to the free industrial zone in Jabal Ali Mountain , an area which  is considered  to be the first in the country  , and tenth in the world  for transit movement . 
</seg> 
</p> 
<p> 
<seg_id=8> 
 Launching ' Dubai Internet city ' coincided with the opening of the annual information fair in Dubai which  is considered  to be the biggest in the Middle East : - Gulf Information Technology Getix . ' 
</seg> 
</p> 
 
Even More "  Proving Rape " 
Chatterbox feels that the Wall Street Journal editorial page 's coverage of Juanita Broaddrick 's rape charges against Bill Clinton   see "  Proving Rape , " " More  Proving Rape , " as well as Michael Kinsley 's " Readme " column in the current issue  cries out for the introduction of the Scientific Method into the usually mushy business of  assessing press responsibility . 
With that in mind , Chatterbox hereby inaugurates the Intellectual Dishonesty   henceforth to be known  as the Indis  Index . 
Here 's how it works  : 
Publications that  refuse  to acknowledge  even if  to refute the importance of   highly significant but inconvenient facts in their news or opinion coverage of controversial events will score one point for the initial offense . 
They will then score one point for every subsequent issue or broadcast or Internet posting after the first offense is noted  by Chatterbox if they continue  not to report said inconvenient fact -- and an additional two points on days when the news organization runs a follow-up without  making note of said inconvenient fact  . 
Publications receiving a score of 10 will be inducted  into the Indis Hall of Fame . 
Publications that  get all the way up to 20 will be faxed  a likeness of Joseph Stalin . 
 Chatterbox would prefer  not to invoke the phrase " intellectual dishonesty , " because it 's pompous and falsely suggests that only intellectuals can be intellectually dishonest . 
But Chatterbox does n't know any other easily understandable phrase that  describes this particular kind of offense .  
For the purposes of this survey , the Wall Street Journal will be counted  as a separate and distinct publication from the Journal 's editorial page , because , in essence , it is *?* . 
The Journal editorial page continues  not to acknowledge that Norma Kelsey , the friend and employee to Juanita Broaddrick who  is one of two people partially corroborating Broaddrick 's rape accusation , is the daughter of a man whose murderer  was pardoned  by Gov. Bill Clinton . 
 responsible account of the whole controversy in today 's New York Times reports that Kelsey says 0 the pardon had nothing 0  to do  with her corroboration .  
The Journal editorial page gets one point for  failing  to note the pardon in its initial Op-Ed by Dorothy Rabinowitz on Feb. 19 . 
Because it has published three times since the initial omission , it scores an additional three points . 
And because it published an editorial  Feb. 22 taunting the rest of the press for  not following it on the story -- and still did n't mention the pardon -- it scores an extra two points . 
That comes to a total of six . 
Chatterbox feels certain that the Journal editorial page will provide some follow-up  tomorrow to tonight 's  broadcast of its own Broaddrick interview , which  means that if the Journal editorial page continues  to take no action it will be in the Indis Hall of Fame by Monday at the latest  
Chatterbox considered but rejected the idea of  awarding Rabinowitz bonus points for  having " eventually convinced " Broaddrick  to grant an interview to the New York Times  as the Times reports *?* in today 's story  . 
But the Scientific Method does not permit any tinkering with the Indis Index 's scoring procedures . 
And besides , Rabinowitz 's efforts on the Times ' behalf were n't really unethical , just puzzling , given the two newspapers ' intense rivalry . 
When Chatterbox asked the Journal 's  bureau chief , Alan Murray , who  exercised good judgment in  not breaking the Broaddrick story  and -- full disclosure -- is Chatterbox 's former boss  ,  to comment about a Journal employee 's feeding sources to the Times  , he replied : " I do n't really have any comment on what the edit page did  , . They do their thing , we do  ours , . " Which  is what Journal news employees are instructed   to say  whenever the editorial page causes them cringing embarrassment  . 
For her part , Rabinowitz explains to Chatterbox that her efforts on behalf of the Times were more indifferent than the Times made them sound . 
" Ms. Broaddrick told me Sunday that a Times reporter had appeared at the house in the a. m, and that she had refused an interview , " Rabinowitz writes 0  in an e-mail message . 
" I asked her why she had decided  to talk to the New York Post ' s Steve Dunleavy , and refused a Times reporter  . 
She said 0 Dunleavy caught her by surprise . 
She asked if I thought 0 it  would be all right  to talk to the Times reporter . 
I told her 0 it would be *?* -- certainly as all right as  talking to Dunleavy . 
She said , ' Well , I 'm sorry 0 I did n't *?* . ' 
She said 0 she would *?* if he called again . 
I passed this on to Times reporter Felicity Barringer during our second day 's interview chat . 
So -- that 's how it  happens that in the New York Times piece today I 'm described  -- solemnly -- as  having ' eventually convinced ' her  to repeat the story to the New York Times  . " 

Husbands and Wives 
Chatterbox feels a little dense for  not realizing sooner that the subtext  and hence much of the appeal  of a Hillary Clinton - Rudy Giuliani Senate race would be Wronged Wife vs. Neglectful Husband . 
By  running against Giuliani  who  has been reported in Vanity Fair  to have a mistress -- he denies it -- and , by all accounts , has a sham marriage  , the first lady could exact symbolic revenge on her philandering husband while  advancing the fortunes of the Democratic party at the same time  
That 's almost enough for Chatterbox to jump on the Hillary for Senate bandwagon . 
The media conventional wisdom is that Giuliani would make Hillary Clinton 's marital problems a major campaign issue . 
" Giuliani makes Ken Starr look like a patsy , " cried  Time this week . 
But , er , would n't that be kind of a risky strategy , given his own problematic union ? 
Many have already opined that the mayor is too vituperative , too much of a loner  to practice the congenial , teamwork - oriented politics of the Senate . ; 
other doubters have pointed to his hardhearted , uncaring social policies . 
The last thing 0 he needs  is  to draw more attention to these qualities in his personal life . 
Giuliani 's estrangement from his wife , Donna Hanover , is made  clear in an interview with Hanover that  appears in today 's New York Times . 
Hanover " would not say whether Giuliani would run for the Senate , whether she would like him to run for Senate , or whether she would campaign for him if he did *?* . 
But she did say in the interview , which  was conducted  before the recent frenzy of speculation about Hillary Rodham Clinton 's interest in the same New York Senate seat , that Mrs. Clinton is a ' very interesting ' person . 
' I think 0 she 's dynamic , and I think 0 she 's very smart , and she 's an amazing speaker , ' Ms. Hanover said  . " 
And , for a punch line : " Ms. Hanover 's press secretary , Joannie Danielides , said this week that Ms. Hanover had no comment on Mrs. Clinton 's potential Senate campaign . " 
Does she have any comment on whether Ms. Hanover plans  to be Hillary Clinton 's campaign manager ? 
Indis Index Update  
 , in its Juanita Broaddrick broadcast last night , turned up an additional three witnesses who  recall  being told  by Broaddrick in the late 1970s that Bill Clinton raped her . 
This diminishes -- slightly -- the significance of Norma Kelsey 's possible motives in  verifying parts of Broaddrick 's story . 
 One of the three is Kelsey 's sister , whose motives  can be similarly questioned  : ; 
the other two heard Broaddrick tell her story but did not see her bruised lip , as only Kelsey and Broaddrick 's husband claim  to have *?* .  
However , Chatterbox notes that  , like every other responsible news organization that  's covered this story , reported that Norma Kelsey 's father 's killer was pardoned  by Gov. Bill Clinton , and remains perplexed that the Journal editorial page wo n't *?* . 
Its Indis Index is today up to seven . 
 
The Entrepreneur Is the New Madonna 
Dear Joe , I know what you mean  about  being a journalist . 
Almost every assignment is a challenge in a different way and it never seems  to get easier . 
I often feel as if I only get half the story sometimes , so I typically do a massive amount of reporting that  is most often much more than I will ever need *?* . 
I think 0 that is why I welcomed  doing a book  -- it gives one the ability  to use so much of what  is left  on the cutting room floor of daily journalism . 
 Think of all the good stuff 0 we all collect  daily in our reporting that we never add  to stories . 
Most often reporters recount these tales with each other and with their sources rather than share them with the general public . 
Much of it , of course ,  using the standards of top newspapers , can not be used  since it is largely gossip 0 we are repeating  , although it certainly could make for some very good stories . 
I often wonder when a really great fictional book will be written  about this era   probably decades and decades hence as it is too close  . 
In any case , there certainly is no lack of information available about the moguls of technology now as they all become our current pop icons . 
I would posit that Bill and Michael and Steve and Jerry have become the Madonnas of the current age of stock market mania and celebration of the entrepreneur . 
So the shift in the image of Gates has been an interesting one 0 for me to watch  . 
The smart - boy technologist is now being painted  as the whiny bully . 
I personally always thought 0 it  was a risk  to pin the image of Microsoft on just one man -- at  , for example , there was a conscious effort  to develop other " characters , " for lack of a better word . 
So there , while you think of Case , you also think of Pittman and Leonsis and increasingly a range of other executives . 
Steve Ballmer , of course , is now getting a lot more attention at Microsoft , but it still seems  to be Bill 's show over there . 
While I did not attend the trial -- I was lucky  to be able  to read your highly amusing and informative dispatches , several of which  made me spit up my lunch  laughing -- it certainly seemed as if the image of Bill Gates took a beating and the insular culture of Microsoft did not look so good . 
That 's ironic , since I think 0 it was just that insularity that  helped them , much in the same way that  has benefited from  being in the Virginia suburbs rather than in Silicon Valley  . 
 would never have existed if it had been founded  here , I am sure 0 *?* , since its employees would have been mocked  into obscurity by the digerati . 
Out in the area , they looked positively exciting next to all the government - oriented contractors . 
I wonder if that means 0 geography is destiny , and it 's still location , location , location . 
From where I am sitting  , I think 0 the Microsoft trial has been the really obvious turning point between the computer era and the digital age . 
I think 0 it almost does not matter what the judge does  since it  's clear that the balance of power is shifting again , although it is not clear where it will land  . 
Will the strongman of the era be  ,  , Microsoft , or one of the big media companies ? 
Or will it be none of them because the Internet allows and encourages a plethora of strong companies and a complex interconnection of businesses where none are allowed  to dominate  ? 
I always use two simple words  when people tell me that one company -- whether it is or Microsoft or Disney -- is in charge of all our destinies  : Babylon was . 
That incredible empire dominated the world and I imagine 0 it  did not seem possible to people living then that anyone could loosen that empire 's grip on humanity . 
But we all know how that story turned out  . 
Now I am getting way too philosophical , but this is my final missive , so why not ? 
Perhaps you could hasten a prediction of where this is all going  . 
As for me , I 'll stick with my philosophy of reporting and , I guess , life -- nobody knows . 
 
No More Kisses 
In light of Secretary of State Albright 's imminent trip to the middle east , the New York Times , Los Angeles Times and Washington Post emphasize the deteriorating situation there . 
But Today stays with Princess Di . 
The states that when Albright shows up on Tuesday  , she will " read the riot act " to Yassir Arafat about  cracking down on terrorism . 
Her goal will be  to get Arafat to come out decisively and publicly for peace with Israel ,  telling him that there can be no more attempts at  co-opting Hamas , and " no more kisses " of its leaders . 
The Times emphasizes the larger geopolitical context . 
Given that the troubles on the West Bank have not only frosted relations between Arafat and Israel , but also those between Israel and Egypt and between Israel and Saudi Arabia , the paper states that the is now facing the prospect that the moderate Arab coalition 0 it built  after the Persian Gulf war  to contain Iraq and Iran is falling apart . 
The focuses on new dissension within the Israeli government about whether or not Israel should continue  to maintain forces in southern Lebanon , dissension fueled  when an Israeli commando raid there late last week was ambushed  , with twelve deaths the result  . 
Perhaps the most striking indicator of a change of mood inside the government reported * by the paper is the news that cabinet member Ariel Sharon , who  as Defense Minister in 1982 got Israel entrenched  in Lebanon in the first place , is among those urging a reconsideration of the deployment . 
Several papers have word that and Block has finally wriggled out of its controlling stake of Compuserve , but it 's the Post with the news that  is set   to take it over . 
The Wall Street Journal " Outlook " observes , " In the job market , the balance of power is shifting to employees from employers , " and states that " the retention frenzy was triggered  in part by previous waves of corporate downsizing , " which  left behind survivors who  took stock of career options and used Internet job listings and intensified recruiting  to land better offers , which  in turn led to counter-offers and higher salaries . 
This has led , says 0 *?* the Journal , to annual compensation rising 5 - 6 percent a year . 
Much of the continuing Diana coverage is spinning off into the realm of meta - and meta-meta-pieces . 
The , for instance , examines what it takes   to be a new " cuddly - feely " Britain born * of the national grief experience . 
But  and the also each run pretty newsy Diana pieces as well . 
Both reveal that Tony Blair had conferred with Diana about a goodwill ambassador job shortly before her death , and reports that Le Figaro says 0 a dying Diana gave two crash witnesses a message for her family and children . 
 Give the credit for  getting Mother Teresa back on the front page and a bonus point for  including some criticism of her in the story . 
" Not everyone in Calcutta , or India for that matter , is unanimous in  praising the nun , whose organization  was able  to raise millions of dollars worldwide but made virtually no significant changes in the social structure of this collapsing city 's poor neighborhoods . 
Salvation -- hers and that of the destitute 0 she rescued  from the gutters -- was her aim , not economic or social development as many others understand it , she said 0  . " 
It  's odd , however , that in  repeating this charge , the Times did n't interview the man most closely associated * with it , Christopher Hitchens , or refer to the book where he set it out  , The Missionary Position . 
Hmmm ,  wan  na bet 0 there was a copy of the book on somebody 's desk at the Times though ? 
What 's  with the top-of-the-front headline 0 the puts  over its picture of Martina Hingis standing next to Venus Williams after  beating her at the Open -- " Venus Brought Back to Earth " ? 
Does n't that sound like  celebrating a defeat rather than celebrating a victory ? 
How odd -- and a good illustration of how  trying  to shoe-horn in a " witty " headline can drive you into an idea that  does n't fit or is undeserved  . 
 
 Fashioning Paula 
Today leads with Texas ' settlement of its product - liability lawsuit against the leading tobacco companies . 
The top nonlocal story at the Washington Post is the latest development in the Indonesian economic crisis -- a rare and boosterish Suharto press conference in contrast to a further plunging stock market and food riots in outlying towns . 
The New York Times leads with a comprehensive poll about American attitudes concerning abortion . 
In the Texas case , reports 0 *?*  , the defendant companies have agreed  to pay about $ 15 billion  over 25 years  to reimburse the state for expenses 0 it incurred  in the treatment of smoking - related illnesses . 
That makes Texas the third state 0  to settle such a case ,  joining Florida and Mississippi . 
There are , says 0 *?* the paper , a total of 40 such suits on file , with Minnesota 's turn coming next week . 
The Wall Street Journal states that the plaintiffs ' lawyers hired * by Texas  to try the case will receive as part of the deal almost $ 2.2 billion  in fees . 
The abortion survey , the first conducted * by the paper since 1989 , was based  on telephone interviews of 1,101 people and detects " a notable shift from general acceptance " of  having the procedure : from 40 percent to 32 percent . 
And the pollsters also detected an increasingly acute sensitivity to abortion timing  
Sixty-one percent of those polled * thought 0 abortions should be permitted  during the first trimester , but only 15 percent in the second and just 7 percent in the third . 
 The piece notes that this last stat helps  explain why a focus on partial - birth abortions has proven politically advantageous for abortion foes  .  
Nearly 45 percent of those asked *  to state the present law on abortion could not give the correct answer . 
The notes that the just - concluded football / deal will probably mean even steeper cable bills in the near future . 
Some local cable companies , the paper says 0 *?* , expect the fees 0 they 'll pay   to go up more than 20 percent . 
And they 're in the habit of  passing expenses along to Joe Remote . 
Even non - sports fans will be affected  , notes 0 *?* the Journal , because  is usually part of basic cable service . 
 Which  raises the question , : Has n't technology progressed to a point that  would allow cafeteria-style programming choices by subscribers ?  
scan of the headlines found * cheek - by - jowl on the ' s Page  provides an interesting snapshot of the life of the modern Cabinet officer : " Ex - Secretary Cisneros 's Ex-Mistress Pleads Guilty , " " Labor Secretary Herman Denies Allegations of Influence - Selling Scheme , " and " Two Tyson Foods Executive Indicted  Over Gifts to Ex - Agriculture Secretary Espy . " 
The reports that , according to an survey , Americans are twice as likely  to back a tax increase going toward the search for extraterrestrials than one for gene - cloning research . 
The reports that today 's issue of the journal Science will describe an experiment in which people 's biological clocks were reset  three hours by  shining a bright light on the back of their knees  . 
The finding , if it holds up , says 0 *?* the Times , may lead to a simple way 0 for airline travelers to fight jet lag  . 
Yesterday 's Los Angeles Times ran a story  under the headline " Paula Jones Works on Her Court Appearance , " which ,   illustrated  by pictures of Jones , was all about the various looks 0 she 's had  since  stepping on the public stage . 
The piece concluded that she 's finally graduated to an image that  's " sophisticated yet soft . " 
Today 's  " Style " section  that 's the opposite of substance ,  remember  picks up that ball and runs with it , with a lengthy discourse on the new . 
" It is , " hyperventilates 0 *?* the Post , one of the most jaw - dropping public make-overs ever . " 
Jones apparently has " smoothed the frizzy mane of curls that  once reached to such dazzling heights . 
Her makeup is now subtle and based  on natural , not neon , hues . 
Her clothing is inspired  by the boardroom instead of the secretarial pool . 
She has embraced the markers of dignity , refinement and power . " 
In true newspaper overkill fashion , the piece backs this up by  consulting Cynde Watson , national makeup artist for Bobbi Brown Essentials , and Steven Zdatny , a historian at West Virginia University specializing in the aesthetics and politics of hair . 
The placement of these two pieces is a triumph , but one carrying the seeds of its own destruction : 
 
Stephanopoulos Analyzes His Own Crime 
There was  former Clinton aide George Stephanopoulos on 's This Week this morning ,  furrow-browed and " heartbroken with all the evidence coming out " against the president . 
Last week , when the Lewinsky story was only a few hours old  , Stephanopoulos popped up on Good Morning America  to demonstrate his concern . 
" These are probably the most serious allegations yet leveled * against the president . 
There 's no question that , if they 're true , they  could lead to impeachment proceedings . " 
Is Chatterbox alone in  thinking 0 there is something strange and even disgusting about Stephanopoulos ' eager show of independence from the president ? 
The problem is n't so much his disloyalty . 
Political figures turn on each other from time to time , for good and bad reasons : ; 
we 're used to it . 
Stephanopoulos wants  to run for the Senate and does n't want  to seem a Clinton stooge . 
By  lending credence to the Lewinsky charges , and treating Clinton 's familiar defenses as the lies and half - lies 0 they seem  to be  , Stephanopoulos shows 0 he 's not a fool . 
The trouble is that Stephanopoulos himself helped propagate those lies in the first place . 
During the 1992 campaign , when Gennifer Flowers first brought Clinton 's philandering to public attention  , Stephanopoulos -- as Clinton 's chief spinner , distracter , and all - around bullshit artist -- played a crucial role in  discrediting Flowers and anyone else who  tried  to point out the truth , namely that Clinton had a disturbing zipper problem . 
  Do n't say 0 Stephanopoulos did n't know . 
Again , he 's not a fool .  
 Simply put  , Stephanopoulos did as much as any man  to get the country into the mess 0 he now so telegenically laments  . 
The 1993 documentary The War Room captures some of his efforts on tape . 
Early in the film , with the Flowers crisis in full bloom , Sam Donaldson interviews Stephanopoulos , who  blames it all on the " Republican attack machine . " 
" Gov. Clinton has no character problem , " Stephanopoulos declares  . 
Donaldson suggests that on 60 Minutes Clinton had admitted to infidelity . 
" He said 0 he had problems in his marriage , " says  Stephanopoulos ,  correcting Donaldson 's deviation from the pre-scripted fudge - phrase of the day . 
 Today , of course , the president 's defenders claim that Clinton admitted infidelity on 60 Minutes and that the fully informed voters simply did n't care .  
Near the end of The War Room , Stephanopoulos gets a call from someone who  apparently claims  to have a list of Clinton paramours , which he is about  to publicize  . 
Stephanopoulos skillfully bullies and cajoles him into  keeping quiet . 
" You would be laughed at  , ... " he tells the caller  . 
" I guarantee you that if you do this you 'll never work in Democratic politics again , ... 
Nobody will believe you and people will think 0 you 're scum . " 
You might say that Stephanopoulos helped invent the philander - protection techniques that  seem  to have made Clinton so overconfident of his ability  to not get caught  . 
He was one of Clinton 's principal enablers ,  to use a word employed * by Maureen Dowd in today 's New York Times . 
When Democrats wonder why there is so much resentment of Clinton   , they do n't need  to look much further than the Big Lie about philandering that Stephanopoulos , Carville  and a cooperative campaign press corps  helped  to put  over in 1992 . 
Now the dissembler and enabler has become the scholar and News analyst . 
It 's as if Roy Cohn went on television in the mid-'50s  to soberly rue the damage wreaked * by Sen. Joe McCarthy , without any apology for his own role . 
Much has been made  of the way 0 famous wrongdoers  e. g : Dick Morris , Marv Albert  rebound too quickly in our celebrity culture  . 
But usually at least a nanosecond of contrition is required  . 
Stephanopoulos is cashing in without  even going through the minimal motions of  holding himself accountable for  misleading the country . 
 
Physics of Semantics ? 
Each of the chapters of Investigations broaches new territory . 
Each is tentative and incomplete , pointing but not fully adequate . 
Yet , I persistently hope 0 *?* , it  is better  to light one candle against , ... what ? 
the darkness ? 
the veil beyond which we have had no framework of questions  before ? 
There are grounds , reasoned about * by the best of philosophers and scientists of the past several centuries ,  to doubt a physics of semantics . 
We are on shaky ground . 
Yet when the first hard frost comes  , when the birches have been swung  , their crimson leaves scattered  carelessly  , when crystals splint shallow ponds and old egrets stand  dark watch the coming dawn ,  long-legged ,  knowing how winter is thin   , when the first phase transition of water to ice forms slight solidity across meadow streams  , small creatures of flesh and concept tiptoe gingerly to some far side where , perhaps , something new is  to be found   . 
We have lacked a physical definition of an autonomous agent , able  to manipulate the universe on its own behalf : — the egret whose foreboding of winter  leads to lifted wing and steady , powerful flight . 
The egret is as much   a part of physical reality as the atom , and perhaps more than the vaunted quark . 
But autonomous agents , we who  do daily manipulate the world on our own behalf , we to whom " intentionality " and " purpose " are so inevitably attributed   by our common languages , we are , by my definition of autonomous agents , also nothing but physical systems with a peculiar organization of processes and properties . 
If the concept of autonomous agents were something like a useful or more , a proper definition of life itself , then autonomous agents span the gap from the merely physical to that new realm of the merely physical where " purpose " is ascribed  by all of us to one another  . 
Semantics enters with purpose . 
For this to be true , it  is not necessary that the carriers of purpose , say , the same bacterium heading upstream in the glucose gradient , be conscious . 
I hope 0 my definition of an autonomous agent   is useful , an autocatalytic system carrying out a work cycle , now rather broadened * by the realization that autonomous agents also do often detect and measure and record displacements of external systems from equilibrium that  can be used   to extract work , then do extract work ,  propagating work and constraint construction , from their environment . 
Know-how 
 Bring ourselves empathetically and objectively back  three billion years to the mixed microbial community flourishing right about where most of us are now  , plus or minus a modicum of layers of surface crustal material . 
I want  to say that the autonomous agents comprising that community had , individually and collectively , the embodied know-how 0  to get on with  making a living in the natural games that  constituted their world . 
Indeed , as I have emphasized *?* before , a biosphere is a self - consistent coconstruction of autonomous agents , ways of  making a living , and the search procedures , mutation , recombination , as well as behavioral search open to autonomous agents . 
Those means of  making a living that  were well searched  out and mastered  by the agents and their search procedures became the kinds of " jobs " that  were widely filled  , the abundant niches of the bio-sphere . 
There is in this whole self - constructing system a wider know-how , beyond the know-how of any single autonomous agent spinning eagerly in its microenvironment . 
Yet , clearly , the know-how is distributed  . 
There is no autonomous agent , no one , who  knows how the whole system works  , any more than anyone at present knows how the global economic system works in its myriad interactions , deals , steals , hopes , and frustrations  . 
What in the world is " know-how "  ? 
Philosophers distinguish between " know-how " and " know that . " 
I know how  to tie my shoes  and am learning how  to play jazz drums  . 
" Know that " concerns propositions , most conveniently , human propositions . 
I know that the moon is : — they tell me 0 *?* : — not made  of green cheese . 
I know that the earth circles the sun , that the earth is roughly spherical , that chairs are used   to sit on *?* . 
" Know that " brings with it the standard and nonstandard issues of the truth or falseness of propositions as they report states of the world . 
Perhaps higher primates who  are trained   to manipulate simple symbols with apparent reference to the world also can " know that " with respect to propositions . 
Unlike " know that , " " know-how " does not involve propositions about the world . 
" Know-how " involves procedural knowledge about how  to get on in the world  . 
The cheetah streaking after the wildebeest , the athletic genius high jumping , have the know-how 0  to do it  . 
Does a bacterium know how  to make a living in its world  ? 
I certainly want  to say yes , without  attributing consciousness in any way . 
 Watch the myriad subtle turnings on and o of genes , metabolic switching , mechanical twitching , sensing of glucose gradient , swimming and tumbling upstream to higher glucose concentrations . 
It knows how all right , even if it can not talk about how it gets on with its business  . 
But then ,  try  to talk about  tying your shoes or the skilled driving when you become aware  some dozens of miles down the road that you have accomplished the tasks without  paying the slightest focused attention  . 
 Thank God for know-how . 
Know that is a thin veneer on a four - billion - year - old know-how skill abundant in the biosphere . 
But any autonomous agent proliferating alone or in a congery of other agents , it would seem 0 *?* , is also graced  by the selfsame know-how . 
If we synthesize autonomous agents in the next decades and they coevolve under our rapt gaze over months or years into a modestly complex ecosystem brimming with novel life forms , they too will know how  to make a living in their mutually created world  plus the boundary conditions 0 we more or less intelligently impose  on them . 
The know-how is , in these terms , nothing but another view of the propagating closures of catalysis , work tasks , sensing , recording , and acting that we now recognize  as inherent in the doings of autonomous agents . 
The know-how is not outside that propagating organization . 
The know-how is the propagating organization . 
Semantics 
All of which  brings us , inevitably , to the brink of semantics . 
It is simple at its roots , you see 0  . 
An incoming molecular species arriving in the interior of an autonomous agent really is i food ; ii poison ; iii a signal ; iv neutral ; v something else . 
Once there is an autonomous agent , there is a semantics from its privileged point of view . 
The incoming molecule is " yuck " or " yum . " 
I think 0 the major conceptual step to yuck or yum is unavoidable once there is an autonomous agent . 
And I think 0 we have roughly the Darwinian criteria in mind . 
If yum , then there will probably be more of this type of agent , offsprings of the first . 
If yuck , it  is not so likely 0 this lineage will prosper . 
Once yuck and yum , we are not far from Pierce 's meaning - laden semiotic triad : sign , signified , significans . 
 Like it or not , the glucose gradient is a sign , a predictor , of " more glucose that way . " 
 Granted * , the glucose is not an arbitrary symbol , any more than a cloud is an arbitrary symbol of rain . 
In this restricted sense , signs are causally correlated  with that which  is signified  . 
By contrast , the relation between the word " chair " and that which it signifies  , and on which I am now sitting  , is arbitrary . 
But can chemical signals in bacterial and plant and human communities be arbitrary from a chemical causal point of view ? 
If so , can " mere chemicals " be signs in the full Piercean sense ? 
I believe 0 it  is clear that mere chemistry in an autonomous agent can harbor symbols and signs in the full senses of the words . 
 Consider first the famous genetic code . 
Triplets of nucleotides in an molecule stand for specific amino acids that  will end up  incorporated  into a protein . 
The detailed causal machinery involves transfer molecules with their anticodon site and the distant site to which amino acids are attached   , the aminoacyle transferase enzymes that  charge the amino acid binding site of each transfer with the proper amino acid among the twenty amino acids , the binding of the charged transfer 's anticodon site to the proper code word triplet , the ribosome that  glides between adjacent charged transfer molecules and links the successive amino acids into the growing polypeptide chain that  hangs  free in the cytoplasm ,  tethered  by the ribosome to the messenger molecule as it is " translated  . " 
The arbitrariness of the genetic code is exemplified  by the evolution of novel transfer molecules , which  translate a given messenger code word triplet into a different amino acid . 
As Monod properly emphasized *?* three decades ago in a slightly different context concerning activation and inhibition of enzymes at allosteric sites on the enzyme that  are distant from the catalytic site , the relation of chemical structures that  achieve control of catalysis are utterly arbitrary with respect to the chemical structures that  undergo the catalysis . 
The same is true of the transfer where the anticodon site is distant from the amino acid binding site  . 
Because of this , which amino acid  is charged  onto a particular transfer is utterly arbitrary and controlled  by the aminoacyle transferase enzyme that  does the charging , plus the structure of the amino acid binding site on the transfer . 
Both of these can be altered  without  altering the anticodon - codon matching mechanism . 
In short , chemistry allows arbitrary organizations of control relations . 
It  seems fully legitimate  to assign the concepts of sign , signified , and significans to the genetic code . 
It  seems legitimate  to extend that notion to much of the subtle signaling , chemical and otherwise , within and between autonomous agents , as  exemplified  by plants that  upon infestation by a particular insect secrete a secondary metabolite chemical that  " warns " other members of the same species that an insect infestation is happening and  to turn on defensive anti-insect secondary metabolites . 
The calculus that  is Claude Shannon 's elegant information theory has always been about reduction of uncertainty about the statistics of the source of a set of symbols . 
Nowhere in the core of Shannon 's work concerning the encoding and transmission of information does the meaning , or semantics , of the information enter . 
This is no criticism , and is widely known and appreciated  . 
There is , however , just a hint of semantics in Shannon 's view that the semantics resides in the " decoder . " 
I can not buy Shannon 's view unless the decoder is an autonomous agent . 
If not , then the decoder merely transforms a bit string sent * along a communication channel into some other discrete or continuous dynamics : — perhaps a set of water - filled bowls is drained  by  turning on a machine that  opens valves between the bowls and to the outside world in particular ways . 
The patterns of bowl drainage upon receipt of the binary string messages sent * along the communication channel constitutes the decoding . 
But if the recipient is an autonomous agent such as a bacterium and the incoming molecule is a symbol-sign of a paramecium or an amoeba on the roam and the bacterium swims away and avoids  becoming dinner , that sequence of events seems  laden with semantics . 
If only the bacterium could tell us : 
" Did you see that truck of a paramecium coming at me ? 
I 've run into that one before  
I ducked under a boulder , and he never sensed me . 
I made it home . 
 Pass me some more glucose please , Martha . " 
I will return in the next chapter  to discuss such stories , for I will say that we can not prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and , therefore , can not deduce that which  will unfold . 
Thus , among other things , we must tell stories  to understand the oriented actions of agents in their worlds . 
 Do not be overly quick  to accuse me of anthropomorphizing . 
I too know the risks , including the common claim that we can always in principle translate from " intentional talk " to the fully predictive causal account of the events in question . 
But patience . 
Not only are we unable  to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and predict what  will unfold , but we also can not even translate : — in the sense of necessary and sucient conditions from legal talk to normal intentional talk , let alone from legal talk of Henderson found   guilty of murder to a physical talk about sound - wave forms monitored * and masses at space - time lines as a description . 
Then  let 's just be naive for the moment . 
The semantics of the yuck or yum coming into a simple autonomous agent say , an early bacterium is somehow linked  with the embodied know-how of that agent in  making a living , or failing  to make a living , in its world . 
The semantics of an event is some subset of the fully embroidered , context - dependent set of causal implications of the event , or signal , in question . 
" For want of a nail , the shoe was lost  ; for want of the shoe , the horse was lost  ; and for want of the horse , the rider was lost  , " more or less , said 0  Benjamin Franklin . 
The semantics of the nail is some subset of this embroidered context - dependent set of implications of the event , or signal , in question to the autonomous agents in the coevolving system . 
It  seems  hard  to ascribe purpose , in the sense of  acting on its own behalf , to a stone or a chair and easy with respect to an alga . 
Of course , there is a sense in which my attribution of semantics to autonomous agents is purely tautological  . 
After all , I began by  stating that a bacterium swimming upstream in the glucose gradient was acting on its own behalf in an environment , defined an autonomous agent as a physical system able  to act on its own behalf , then asked what a physical system must be  such that it can act on its own behalf . 
Now , five chapters later , it  is hardly an independent deduction that autonomous agents  are the proposed organization of matter , energy , and organization to which purposes can be ascribed   in the sense of  being able  to act on their own behalf . 
My definition is a definitional circle . 
On the other hand , while the definition is circular , like = and Darwin 's " natural selection " and " fitness , " that does not mean that the set of codefined concepts surrounding my definition of an autonomous agent as a reproducing system that  does a work cycle fails  to touch the real world . 
Stones and chairs are not , by my definition , autonomous agents . 
All living cells are *?* . 
And the stunning fact directly before us , every day , is that autonomous agents do manipulate the world on their own behalf . 
 Watch a pair of nesting birds build their nest . 
In short , once we have autonomous agents and yuck and yum , it appears that semantics enters the universe as the agents coevolve and behave on their own behalf with one another in the unfolding of a biosphere . 
Knowing 
What about " knowing " ? 
Daniel Dennett , in his fine book Darwin 's Dangerous Idea , advances a hierarchy of forms of " knowing , " if I may use that term , that  have arisen in evolution by Darwinian means . 
I find his hierarchy congenial and informative . 
Dennett envisions evolution as a sequence of kinds of construction cranes that  bit by bit build up higher - order entities via variation and natural selection . 
I do not disagree , although I have placed far greater emphasis on the roles of self-organization in evolution . 
Here , in Investigations , I am trying  to point at the mysterious but utterly natural hopefulness in which an increasing diversity of broken symmetries in the universe creates the diversity of structures and processes that  can constitute and identify ramified and ramifying sources of energy , detect those sources of energy , create devices and processes that  couple to those sources of energy , and generate yet more diversity that  propagates macroscopic order even further  . 
I wonder , in short , at the naturalness and self-generaticity of Dennett 's cranes building cranes building cranes in biospheres , perhaps planetary geologies , and beyond . 
But back to the past . 
Dennett distinguishes " Darwinian creatures , " " Pavlovian creatures , " " Popperian creatures , " and " Gregorian creatures . " 
simple autonomous agent , say , a bacterium , is a Darwinian creature . 
In its simplest version , the creature evolves by mutation , also recombination and natural selection . 
For the moment , no behavioral learning is  to be considered  . 
So one  or a colony or an ecosystem  of Darwinian creatures adapts more or less as Darwin told us . 
At the next level up , say , aplysia , a nervous system is present , and the creature is capable of stimulus - response learning , à la Pavlov . 
Indeed , aplysia can learn very simple conditioned stimuli : — the later analogue is the bell causing the dog to salivate in " expectation " of food . 
At the next level  Dennett , perhaps properly , reserves this for us vertebrates  is  the Popperian creature . 
Popperian creatures , in Dennett 's fine phrase , have " internal models " of their world and can " run the internal model " with the clutch disengaged  , rather than  running the model in real time in the real world . 
This allows us lucky Popperian creatures to allow our " hypotheses to die in our stead . " 
I love that image . 
Beyond the Popperian is  the Gregorian creature namely , at least humans . 
Dennett makes the wonderful argument that we utilize our tools literally stone knives , arrows , digging sticks , machine tools  to enlarge our shared world of facts and processes . 
This enlarged shared world gives us more know-how , and more know that . 
Cultural evolution , at some point , begins  to burst out - of - bounds . 
Hard rock music jangles the minarets of Iran . 
Who  knows what new cultural forms will blossom  ? 
Chinese cooking lands in Cuba , and Cuban - Chinese cuisine is invented  . 
What 's  next under the sun ? 
Who can  say ? 
I very much like Dennett 's ladder of know-how , and eventual know that . 
Without  invoking consciousness , not because it is not worth  invoking but because so little sensible has ever been said  on the subject , it seems worth  asking how much of this hierarchy  could be realized  by simple molecular systems , even without  evoking nerve cells . 
I would think 0 a lot of this hierarchy could find molecular realizations . 
For example , bacteria and amoebae do have a kind of Pavlovian learning already , for they have receptors that  accommodate to a constant level of a given signal ligand and sense instead a change from the current level . 
This is not yet the association of a more or less arbitrary conditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus , but I can imagine chemistry to accomplish the latter . 
As neurons are supposed  to proliferate and form novel synaptic connections that  survive if  used  and to mediate the linkage of conditioned  to unconditioned  stimulus , why  not envision a complex chemistry , say , very complex carbohydrate - synthesis patterns sustained * by complex sets of enzymes whose activities  are modulated  by the dierent carbohydrates themselves , which  is true of contemporary carbohydrate metabolism  . 
Such a system might blindly try out variant patterns of synthesis until it could establish a self - sustaining web linking the carbohydrates , the enzymes , and certain protein receptors mediating the linkage between unconditioned and conditioned stimulus , then maintain that linkage by positive feedback loops . 
The image is not too far from how it  is imagined  that " idiotype " and " anti-idiotype " immune networks work  to sustain synthesis of a set of desired antibodies against an incoming pathogen  . 
In such networks , for which there is modestly good evidence  , a given first antibody serves as an antigen that  stimulates the body  to produce a second antibody that  binds to the unique amino acid sequences , called *  the " idiotype " of the first antibody . 
In turn , the second " anti-idiotype " antibody stimulates a third , which  stimulates a fourth . 
But this series is likely  to form feedback loops because the first and third antibody can often both bind to the same site on the second antibody , hence , the first and third antibodies are similar shapes in shape space . 
It  is not much of a stretch  to think of the immune system as a conditioned stimulus response system . 
Popperian creatures ? 
Why can not the molecular-sensing and hypothesis-testing churning concerns of the bacterium as it senses a paramecium churn twenty cycles before  kicking in the rotary motor , or not , such that the wee bacterium hides under a boulder of a grain of sand until the beast passes by  ? 
Are nerves necessary ? 
Plants , as  noted  , are said  to signal one another with complex secondary metabolites  to characterize the particular kinds of insects infesting the glade . 
There are arbitrary structural relations between the metabolite and the insect , just as symbols in human language are often arbitrary with respect to the signified . 
Not bad for nerveless nonvertebrates . 
I do get stuck at Gregorian creatures . 
Even here , the free and open creating of new symbol strings in a language , wherever new sentences can be created   , is not that fundamentally different from the persistent open creation of new kinds of molecules in the biosphere as a whole . 
If the conversation 0 we recent two-legged ones are having  with respect to our digging sticks and atomic bombs is impressive , so too is  the chemical conversation in any full - fledged ecosystem , where we are all instrumental in the lives of one another  . 
I suppose 0 I am naively driven   to consider that the biosphere , with its urgent diversity in which ,  emboldened  by all our know-how , we do get on with a very rich conversation  , may very early already have harbored all the levels of which Dennett speaks  . 
We humans are just more gregarious with our vocal cords and e-mail , I guess 0  . 
Smart place , a biosphere , lots 0  to talk about  . 
Four billion years of yammering . 
Slapstick comedy may have started a long time ago . 
Ethics 
And what of ethics ? 
Does a whiff of ethical issue arise with autonomous agents ? 
Yuck or yum from my point of view if I am an autonomous agent . 
There are deep reasons for caution . 
Hume told us long ago about the " naturalistic fallacy " : One can not deduce " ought " from " is . " 
From the fact that mothers care for their young , we can not deduce that they ought  to do so , Hume argued 0  . 
From the fact that Hitler set out  to conquer Europe and more and to kill Jewry , we can not deduce that he ought  to have done so . 
Indeed , Hume 's injunction underlies the caution of scientists about  making ethical statements . 
We scientists find the facts . 
You citizens across the globe can argue the ethics . 
But if Hume warns us  not to deduce ought from is , where do values come from  at all ? 
Hume 's injunction against deduction from is to ought nevertheless began by  recognizing the legitimacy of the category " ought . " 
The efforts  following Hume  to understand the meaning of ethical assertions have been long , twisted , arduous . 
 Following the dictates  of the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle that only those statements capable of verification were meaningful , philosophers as famous as Moore came  to wonder if ethical assertions were merely emotive utterances . 
" It  is wrong  to kill . " 
 Becomes , " Agggah  " 
Does the positivist argument seem persuasive ? 
It  has always amused me that the core injunction of the logical positivists , " only those statements that  are empirically verifiable are meaningful , " is itself not empirically verifiable . 
One is reminded  of something about hoisting and petards . 
John Rawls of Harvard has argued eloquently that our human notions of fairness derive from what we would all " contractually " agree to  , were we  to know before birth that we would all be born  with differing abilities and endowments . 
Thus " equality before the law " is one contract that Rawls commends  to us . 
" Equality before the law " is far more refined than the yuck or yum of the bacterium . 
The emergence of ethics in the evolution of life on this planet is a fascinating issue . 
I will content myself with  wondering where " value " and the rudiments of " intentionality " come from  in the physical universe in the first place and leave social contracts for other efforts . 
Where is the place of value in a world of fact  ? 
So , a short soliloquy . 
Facts are know-that statements . 
But know-how preceded know that . 
While  fully aware of Hume 's injunction , I think that from the autonomous agent 's perspective , yuck or yum is primary , unavoidable , and of the deepest importance to that agent . 
I suppose 0 we apply the Darwinian criteria . 
Too much yuck , this one and its progeny are gone from the future of the biosphere . 
Without  attributing consciousness to an coli , or an autonomous agent 0 we may create  in the near future , I can not help but  feel that the rudiments of value are present once autonomous agents are around . 
And again without  attributing consciousness , once an autonomous agent is around is the rudiment of intentionality present ? 
If so , another cornerstone of ethical activity has been laid  . 
Ethical behavior requires first the logical possibility of behavior for which one is responsible  . 
You are not responsible for acts and effects beyond your control . 
 To act ethically , you must first be able  to act at all . 
But what are " acts "  in the first place ? 
Daniel Yamins is a brilliant young mathematician . 
 Now entering Harvard , Dan spent a summer with me at the Santa Fe Institute before he learned  to drive , after an earlier summer spent * in the laboratory of Jack Szostak at Harvard , where , at age fourteen , Dan was learning  to evolve molecules 0  to bind arbitrary ligands  . 
Dan and I struggled that summer  to make the distinction between the " doings " of an autonomous agent and mere happenings in and around the autonomous agent . 
 Note 0 we say 0 the coli is swimming upstream in the glucose gradient  to get dinner . 
But all sorts of molecular vibrational , rotational , and translational motions are occurring . 
What are actions  and what are mere happenings  ? 
I do not think 0 we were successful in  drawing a clean distinction between doings and happenings with clear mathematics . 
But I sense that the distinction between doings and happenings , Dan 's happy phrasing , is relevant for coli , tigers , us , trees , and autonomous agents in general . 
We will meet a similar problem in the next chapter when we attempt  to distinguish between the function of a part of an organism and the other causal consequences of that part of the organism  . 
Strange and interesting , is it  not , that these issues all seem  to arise with autonomous agents but not otherwise ? 
  Granted  that we here seem  to confront the language game circularity alluded to * earlier , yet I do truly think that the rudiments of semantics , intentionality , value , and ethics arise with autonomous agents . 
I do not think 0 those rudiments suffice  to jump over Hume 's naturalistic fallacy . 

 
After the attacks had occurred , while crisis managers were still sorting out a number of unnerving false alarms , Air Force One flew to Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana . 
One of these alarms was of a reported threat against Air Force One itself , a threat eventually run * down to a misunderstood communication in the hectic White House Situation Room that morning . 
While the plan at the elementary school had been  to return to Washington , by the time 0 Air Force One was airborne at 9:55   the Secret Service , the President 's advisers , and Vice President Cheney were strongly advising against it . 
President Bush reluctantly acceded to this advice and , at about 10:10 , Air Force One changed course and began  heading due west . 
The immediate objective was  to find a safe location : - not too far away : - where the President could land  and speak to the American people . 
The Secret Service was also interested in  refueling the aircraft and paring down the size of the traveling party . 
The President 's military aide , an Air Force officer , quickly researched the options and , sometime around 10:20 , identified Barksdale Air Force Base as an appropriate interim destination . 
When Air Force One landed at Barksdale at about 11:45  , personnel from the local Secret Service office were still en route to the airfield . 
The motorcade consisted of a military police lead vehicle and a van . ; 
the proposed briefing theater had no phones or electrical outlets . 
Staff scrambled  to prepare another room for the President 's remarks , while the lead Secret Service agent reviewed the security situation with superiors in Washington . 
The President completed his statement , which  for security reasons was taped  and not broadcast  live , and the traveling party returned to Air Force One . 
The next destination was discussed   
once again the Secret Service recommended against  returning to Washington , and the Vice President agreed . 
Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska was chosen  because of its elaborate command and control facilities , and because it could accommodate overnight lodging for 50 persons . 
The Secret Service wanted a place where the President could spend several days  , if necessary . 
Air Force One arrived at Offutt at 2:50  
At about 3:15 , President Bush met with his principal advisers through a secure video teleconference . 
Rice said 0 President Bush began the meeting with the words , " We 're at war , " and that Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet said 0 the agency was still assessing who  was responsible , but the early signs all pointed to al Qaeda . 
That evening the Deputies Committee returned to the pending presidential directive 0 they had labored over  during the summer . 
The secretary of defense directed the nation 's armed forces to Defense Condition 3 , an increased state of military readiness . 
For the first time in history , all nonemergency civilian aircraft in the United States were grounded  ,  stranding tens of thousands of passengers across the country . 
Contingency plans for the continuity of government and the evacuation of leaders had been implemented  . 
The Pentagon had been struck  : ; 
the White House or the Capitol had narrowly escaped direct attack . 
Extraordinary security precautions were put  in place at the nation 's borders and ports . 
In the late afternoon , the President overruled his aides ' continuing reluctance  to have him return to Washington and ordered Air Force One back to Andrews Air Force Base . 
He was flown  by helicopter back to the White House ,  passing over the still : - smoldering Pentagon . 
At 8:30 that evening , President Bush addressed the nation from the White House . 
After  emphasizing that the first priority was  to help the injured and protect against any further attacks , he said : " We will make no distinction between the terrorists who  committed these acts and those who  harbor them . " 
He quoted Psalm 23 : - " though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death ... " 
No American , he said *?* , " will ever forget this day . " 
Following his speech , President Bush met again with his National Security Council  , expanded *  to include Secretary of Transportation Norman Mineta and Joseph Allbaugh , the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency . 
Secretary of State Colin Powell , who  had returned from Peru after  hearing of the attacks , joined the discussion . 
They reviewed the day 's events . 
   
As the urgent domestic issues accumulated , White House Deputy Chief of Staff Joshua Bolten chaired a temporary " domestic consequences " group . 
The agenda in those first days is worth  noting , partly as a checklist for future crisis planners . 
It began with problems of how  to help victims and stanch the flowing losses to the American economy , such as  Organizing federal emergency assistance  . 
One question was what kind of public health advice   to give  about the air quality in Lower Manhattan in the vicinity of the fallen buildings . 
 Compensating victims . 
They evaluated legislative options ,  eventually setting up a federal compensation fund and defining the powers of a special master 0  to run it . 
 Determining federal assistance . 
On September 13 , President Bush promised  to provide $ 20 billion  for New York City , in addition to the $ 20 billion  0 his budget director had already guessed 0  might be needed  for the country as a whole . 
 Restoring civil aviation . 
On the morning of September 13 , the national airspace reopened for use by airports that  met newly improvised security standards . 
 Reopening the financial markets . 
After extraordinary emergency efforts involving the White House , the Treasury Department , and the Securities and Exchange Commission , aided * by unprecedented cooperation among the usually competitive firms of the financial industry , the markets reopened on Monday , September 17 . 
 Deciding when and how  to return border and port security to more normal operations  . 
 Evaluating legislative proposals 0  to bail out the airline industry and cap its liability . 
The very process of  reviewing these issues underscored the absence of an effective government organization dedicated * to  assessing vulnerabilities and handling problems of protection and preparedness . 
Though a number of agencies had some part of the task , none had security as its primary mission . 
By September 14 , Vice President Cheney had decided  to recommend , at least as a first step , a new White House entity 0  to coordinate all the relevant agencies rather than tackle the challenge of  combining them in a new department . 
This new White House entity would be a homeland security adviser and Homeland Security Council : - paralleling the National Security Council system . 
Vice President Cheney reviewed the proposal with President Bush and other advisers . 
President Bush announced the new post and its first occupant : - Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge : - in his address to a joint session of Congress on September 20 . 
Beginning on September 11 , Immigration and Naturalization Service agents working in cooperation with the began  arresting individuals  for immigration violations whom they encountered  while  following up leads in the 's investigation of the 9/11 attacks . 
Eventually , 768 aliens were arrested  as " special interest " detainees . 
Some  such as Zacarias Moussaoui  were actually in custody before 9/11 : ; 
most were arrested  after . 
Attorney General John Ashcroft told us that he saw his job in  directing this effort as " risk minimization , " both  to find out who  had committed the attacks and  to prevent a subsequent attack . 
Ashcroft ordered all special interest immigration hearings closed  to the public , family members , and press ; directed government attorneys  to seek denial of bond until such time as they were " cleared "  of terrorist connections by the and other agencies ; and ordered the identity of the detainees kept   secret . 
attorneys charged * with  prosecuting the immigration violations had trouble  getting information about the detainees and any terrorist connections : ; 
in the chaos after the attacks , it  was very difficult  to reach law enforcement officials , who  were following up on other leads . 
The clearance process approved * by the Justice Department was time - consuming ,  lasting an average of about 80 days . 
We have assessed this effort  to detain aliens of " special interest . " 
The detainees were lawfully held  on immigration charges . 
Records indicate that 531 were deported  , 162 were released  on bond , 24 received some kind of immigration benefits , 12 had their proceedings terminated  , and 8 : - one of whom  was Moussaoui : - were remanded  to the custody of the Marshals Service . 
The inspector general of the Justice Department found significant problems in the way 0 the 9/11 detainees were treated   . 
In response to a request about the counterterrorism benefits of the 9/11 detainee program , the Justice Department cited six individuals on the special interest detainee list ,  noting that two  including Moussaoui  were linked  directly to a terrorist organization and that it had obtained new leads helpful to the investigation of the 9/11 terrorist attacks . 
 senior al Qaeda detainee has stated that government efforts  after the 9/11 attacks  to monitor the American homeland , including review of Muslims ' immigration files and deportation of nonpermanent residents , forced al Qaeda  to operate less freely in the United States . 
The government 's ability  to collect intelligence inside the United States , and the sharing of such information between the intelligence and law enforcement communities , was not a priority before 9/11 . 
Guidelines on this subject issued * in August 2001 by Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson essentially recapitulated prior guidance . 
However , the attacks of 9/11 changed everything . 
Less than one week after September 11 , an early version of what  was  to become the Patriot Act  officially , the Act  began  to take shape . 
central provision of the proposal was the removal of " the wall " on information sharing between the intelligence and law enforcement communities  discussed * in chapter 3  
Ashcroft told us 0 he was determined  to take every conceivable action , within the limits of the Constitution ,  to identify potential terrorists and deter additional attacks . 
The administration developed a proposal that  eventually passed both houses of Congress by large majorities and was signed  into law on October 26 . 
Flights of Saudi Nationals Leaving the United States 
Three questions have arisen with respect to the departure of Saudi nationals from the United States in the immediate aftermath of 9/11  
1 Did any flights of Saudi nationals take place before national airspace reopened on September 13 , 2001 ? 
2 Was there any political intervention 0  to facilitate the departure of Saudi nationals ? 
3 Did the screen Saudi nationals thoroughly before their departure ? 
First , we found no evidence that any flights of Saudi nationals , domestic or international , took place before the reopening of national airspace on the morning of September 13 , 2001 
To the contrary , every flight 0 we have identified  occurred after national airspace reopened . 
Second , we found no evidence of political intervention . 
We found no evidence that anyone at the White House above the level of Richard Clarke participated in a decision on the departure of Saudi nationals . 
The issue came up in one of the many video teleconferences of the interagency group 0 Clarke chaired  , and Clarke said 0 he approved of how the was dealing with the matter  when it came up for interagency discussion at his level  . 
Clarke told us , " I asked the , Dale Watson , ...  to handle that , to check  to see if that was all right with them , to see if they wanted access to any of these people , and to get back to me . 
And if they had no objections , it would be fine with me . " 
Clarke added , " I have no recollection of  clearing it with anybody at the White House . " 
Although White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card remembered someone telling him about the Saudi request shortly after 9/11 , he said 0 he had not talked to the Saudis and did not ask anyone  to do anything about it . 
The President and Vice President told us 0 they were not aware of the issue at all until it surfaced much later in the media . 
None of the officials 0 we interviewed  recalled any intervention or direction on this matter from any political appointee . 
Third , we believe that the conducted a satisfactory screening of Saudi nationals who  left the United States on charter flights . 
The Saudi government was advised  of  and agreed to  the 's requirements that passengers be identified  and checked  against various databases before the flights departed . 
The Federal Aviation Administration representative working in the operations center made   sure that the was aware of the flights of Saudi nationals and was able  to screen the passengers before they were allowed  to depart . 
The interviewed all persons of interest on these flights prior to their departures . 
They concluded that none of the passengers was connected  to the 9/11 attacks and have since found no evidence 0  to change that conclusion  . 
Our own independent review of the Saudi nationals involved * confirms that no one with known links to terrorism departed on these flights . 
    
By late in the evening of September 11 , the President had addressed the nation on the terrible events of the day . 
Vice President Cheney described the President 's mood as somber . 
The long day was not yet over . 
When the larger meeting that  included his domestic department heads broke up  , President Bush chaired a smaller meeting of top advisers , a group 0 he would later call   his " war council . " 
This group usually included Vice President Cheney , Secretary of State Powell , Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld , General Hugh Shelton , Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs  0  later to become chairman  General Myers , Tenet , Attorney General Ashcroft , and Director Robert Mueller . 
From the White House staff , National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice and Chief of Staff Card  were part of the core group ,  often joined  by their deputies , Stephen Hadley and Joshua Bolten . 
In this restricted National Security Council meeting , the President said 0 it was a time for self - defense . 
The United States would punish not just the perpetrators of the attacks , but also those who  harbored them . 
Secretary Powell said 0 the United States had  to make it  clear to Pakistan , Afghanistan , and the Arab states that the time 0  to act  was now . 
He said 0 we would need  to build a coalition . 
The President noted that the attacks provided a great opportunity  to engage Russia and China . 
Secretary Rumsfeld urged the President and the principals  to think broadly about who  might have harbored the attackers , including Iraq , Afghanistan , Libya , Sudan , and Iran . 
He wondered aloud how much evidence the United States would need  in order  to deal with these countries ,  pointing out that major strikes could take up to 60 days  to assemble *?* . 
President Bush chaired two more meetings of the on September 12 . 
In the first meeting , he stressed that the United States was at war with a new and different kind of enemy . 
The President tasked principals  to go beyond their pre/11 work and develop a strategy 0  to eliminate terrorists and punish those who  support them . 
As they worked on  defining the goals and objectives of the upcoming campaign , they considered a paper that  went beyond al Qaeda  to propose the " elimination of terrorism as a threat to our way of life , " an aim that  would include  pursuing other international terrorist organizations in the Middle East . 
Rice chaired a Principals Committee meeting on September 13 in the Situation Room  to refine how the fight against al Qaeda would be conducted   . 
The principals agreed that the overall message should be that anyone supporting al Qaeda would risk harm . 
The United States would need  to integrate diplomacy , financial measures , intelligence , and military actions into an overarching strategy . 
The principals also focused on Pakistan and what it could do   to turn the Taliban against al Qaeda . 
They concluded that if Pakistan decided not  to help the United States , it too would be at risk . 
The same day , Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage met with the Pakistani ambassador to the United States , Maleeha Lodhi , and the visiting head of Pakistan 's military intelligence service , Mahmud Ahmed . 
Armitage said that the United States wanted Pakistan to take seven steps , :  to stop al Qaeda operatives at its border and end all logistical support for Bin Ladin ;  to give the United States blanket overflight and landing rights for all necessary military and intelligence operations ;  to provide territorial access to and allied military intelligence and other personnel  to conduct operations against al Qaeda ;  to provide the United States with intelligence information ;  to continue  to publicly condemn the terrorist acts ;  to cut off all shipments of fuel to the Taliban and stop recruits from  going to Afghanistan ; and , if the evidence implicated bin Ladin and al Qaeda and the Taliban continued  to harbor them ,  to break relations with the Taliban government . 
Pakistan made its decision swiftly . 
That afternoon , Secretary of State Powell announced at the beginning of an meeting that Pakistani President Musharraf had agreed to every request for support in the war on terrorism . 
The next day , the embassy in Islamabad confirmed that Musharraf and his top military commanders had agreed to all seven demands . 
" Pakistan will need full support as it proceeds with us , " the embassy noted  . 
" Musharraf said 0 the  government of Pakistan  was making substantial concessions in  allowing use of its territory and that he would pay a domestic price . 
His standing in Pakistan was certain  to suffer . 
 To counterbalance that he needed  to show that Pakistan was benefiting from his decisions . " 
At the September 13  meeting , when Secretary Powell described Pakistan 's reply  , President Bush led a discussion of an appropriate ultimatum to the Taliban . 
He also ordered Secretary Rumsfeld  to develop a military plan against the Taliban . 
The President wanted the United States to strike the Taliban , step back , wait  to see if they got the message , and hit them hard if they did not *?* . 
He made   clear that the military should focus on targets that  would influence the Taliban 's behavior . 
President Bush also tasked the State Department , which  on the following day delivered to the White House a paper titled * " Game Plan for a Political - Military Strategy for Pakistan and Afghanistan . " 
The paper took it  as a given that Bin Ladin would continue  to act against the United States even while  under Taliban control . 
It therefore detailed specific demands for the Taliban , :  surrender Bin Ladin and his chief lieutenants , including Ayman al Zawahiri ;  tell the United States what the Taliban knew  about al Qaeda and its operations ;  close all terrorist camps ;  free all imprisoned foreigners ; and  comply with all Security Council resolutions . 
The State Department proposed  delivering an ultimatum  to the Taliban , :  produce Bin Ladin and his deputies and shut down al Qaeda camps within 24 to 48 hours , or the United States will use all necessary means  to destroy the terrorist infrastructure . 
The State Department did not expect the Taliban to comply . 
Therefore , State and Defense would plan  to build an international coalition 0  to go into Afghanistan . 
Both departments would consult with  and other allies and request intelligence , basing , and other support from countries , according to their capabilities and resources . 
Finally , the plan detailed a public stance , : America would use all its resources  to eliminate terrorism as a threat , punish those responsible for the 9/11 attacks , hold states and other actors responsible for  providing sanctuary to terrorists , work with a coalition  to eliminate terrorist groups and networks , and avoid malice toward any people , religion , or culture . 
President Bush recalled that he quickly realized that the administration would have  to invade Afghanistan with ground troops . 
But the early briefings to the President and Secretary Rumsfeld on military options were disappointing . 
Tommy Franks , the commanding general of Central Command  , told us that the President was dissatisfied . 
The military , Franks said 0 *?* , did not have an off-the-shelf plan  to eliminate the al Qaeda threat in Afghanistan . 
The existing Infinite Resolve options did not , in his view , amount to such a plan . 
All these diplomatic and military plans were reviewed  over the weekend of September 15 - 16 , as President Bush convened his war council at Camp David . 
Present were  Vice President Cheney , Rice , Hadley , Powell , Armitage , Rumsfeld , Ashcroft , Mueller , Tenet , Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz , and Cofer Black , chief of the 's Counterterrorist Center . 
Tenet described a plan for  collecting intelligence and mounting covert operations . 
He proposed  inserting teams into Afghanistan  to work with Afghan warlords who  would join the fight against al Qaeda . 
These teams would act jointly with the military 's Special Operations units . 
President Bush later praised this proposal ,  saying 0 it had been a turning point in his thinking . 
General Shelton briefed the principals on the preliminary plan for Afghanistan that the military had put  together . 
It drew on the Infinite Resolve " phased campaign " plan 0 the Pentagon had begun  developing  in November 2000 as an addition to the strike options 0 it had been refining  since 1998 . 
But Shelton added a new element : - the possible significant use of ground forces : - and that is where President Bush reportedly focused his attention  . 
After  hearing from his senior advisers , President Bush discussed with Rice the contents of the directives 0 he would issue   to set all the plans into motion . 
Rice prepared a paper that President Bush then considered  with principals on Monday morning , September 17 . 
" The purpose of this meeting , " he recalled  saying *?* , " is  to assign tasks for the first wave of the war against terrorism . 
It starts today . " 
In a written set of instructions slightly refined during the morning meeting , President Bush charged Ashcroft , Mueller , and Tenet  to develop a plan for homeland defense . 
President Bush directed Secretary of State Powell  to deliver an ultimatum  to the Taliban along the lines that his department had originally proposed  . 
The State Department was also tasked   to develop a plan  to stabilize Pakistan and to be prepared   to notify Russia and countries near Afghanistan when hostilities were imminent  . 
In addition , Bush and his advisers discussed new legal authorities for covert action in Afghanistan , including the administration 's first Memorandum of Notification on Bin Ladin . 
Shortly thereafter , President Bush authorized broad new authorities for the . 
President Bush instructed Rumsfeld and Shelton  to develop further the Camp David military plan  to attack the Taliban and al Qaeda if the Taliban rejected the ultimatum . 
The President also tasked Rumsfeld  to ensure that robust measures 0  to protect American military forces against terrorist attack were implemented  worldwide . 
Finally , he directed Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill  to craft a plan  to target al Qaeda 's funding and seize its assets . 
staff members had begun  leading meetings on terrorist fund-raising by September 18 . 
Also by September 18 , Powell had contacted 58 of his foreign counterparts and received offers of general aid , search - and - rescue equipment and personnel , and medical assistance teams . 
On the same day , Deputy Secretary of State Armitage was called  by Mahmud Ahmed regarding a two - day visit to Afghanistan during which the Pakistani intelligence chief had met with Mullah Omar and conveyed the demands  . 
Omar 's response was " not negative on all these points . " 
But the administration knew that the Taliban was unlikely  to turn over Bin Ladin . 
The pre/11 draft presidential directive on al Qaeda evolved into a new directive , National Security Presidential Directive 9 , now titled * "   Defeating the Terrorist Threat to the United States . " 
The directive would now extend to a global war on terrorism , not just on al Qaeda . 
It also incorporated the President 's determination  not to distinguish between terrorists and those who  harbor them . 
It included a determination  to use military force if necessary  to end al Qaeda 's sanctuary in Afghanistan . 
The new directive : - formally signed * on October 25 , after the fighting in Afghanistan had already begun : - included new material followed * by annexes discussing each targeted terrorist group . 
The old draft directive on al Qaeda became , in effect , the first annex . 
The United States would strive  to eliminate all terrorist networks , dry up their financial support , and prevent them from  acquiring weapons of mass destruction . 
The goal was the " elimination of terrorism as a threat to our way of life . " 
" "     
President Bush had wondered immediately after the attack whether Saddam Hussein 's regime might have had a hand in it . 
Iraq had been an enemy of the United States for 11 years , and was the only place in the world where the United States was engaged  in ongoing combat operations  . 
As a former pilot , the President was struck  by the apparent sophistication of the operation and some of the piloting , especially Hanjour 's high - speed dive into the Pentagon . 
He told us 0 he recalled Iraqi support for Palestinian suicide terrorists as well . 
 Speculating about other possible states that  could be involved  , the President told us 0 he also thought about Iran . 
Clarke has written that on the evening of September 12 , President Bush told him and some of his staff  to explore possible Iraqi links to 9/11 . 
"  See if Saddam did this , " Clarke recalls the President telling them  . 
"  See if he 's linked  in any way . " 
While he believed the details of Clarke 's account to be incorrect , President Bush acknowledged that he might well have spoken to Clarke at some point ,  asking him about Iraq . 
 Responding to a presidential tasking , Clarke 's office sent a memo  to Rice on September 18 , titled *  " Survey of Intelligence Information on Any Iraq Involvement in the September 11 Attacks . " 
Rice 's chief staffer on Afghanistan , Zalmay Khalilzad , concurred in its conclusion that only some anecdotal evidence linked Iraq to al Qaeda . 
The memo found no " compelling case " that Iraq had either planned or perpetrated the attacks . 
It passed along a few foreign intelligence reports , including the Czech report alleging an April 2001 Prague meeting between Atta and an Iraqi intelligence officer  discussed * in chapter 7  and a Polish report that personnel at the headquarters of Iraqi intelligence in Baghdad were told  before September 11  to go on the streets  to gauge crowd reaction to an unspecified event . 
 Arguing that the case for links between Iraq and al Qaeda was weak , the memo pointed out that Bin Ladin resented the secularism of Saddam Hussein 's regime . 
Finally , the memo said 0 *?* , there was no confirmed reporting on Saddam cooperating with Bin Ladin on unconventional weapons . 
On the afternoon of 9/11 , according to contemporaneous notes , Secretary Rumsfeld instructed General Myers  to obtain quickly as much information as possible . 
The notes indicate that he also told Myers that he was not simply interested in  striking empty training sites . 
He thought 0 the response should consider a wide range of options and possibilities . 
The secretary said 0 his instinct was  to hit Saddam Hussein at the same time : - not only Bin Ladin . 
Secretary Rumsfeld later explained that at the time , he had been considering either one of them , or perhaps someone else , as the responsible party . 
According to Rice , the issue of what , if anything ,  to do  about Iraq was really engaged  at Camp David . 
Briefing papers on Iraq , along with many others , were in briefing materials for the participants . 
Rice told us 0 the administration was concerned that Iraq would take advantage of the 9/11 attacks . 
She recalled that in the first Camp David session chaired * by the President , Rumsfeld asked what the administration should do  about Iraq . 
Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz made the case for  striking Iraq during " this round " of the war on terrorism . 
 Defense Department paper for the Camp David briefing book on the strategic concept for the war on terrorism specified three priority targets for initial action , : al Qaeda , the Taliban , and Iraq . 
It argued that of the three , al Qaeda and Iraq posed a strategic threat to the United States . 
Iraq 's long - standing involvement in terrorism was cited  , along with its interest in weapons of mass destruction . 
Secretary Powell recalled that Wolfowitz : - not Rumsfeld : - argued that Iraq was ultimately the source of the terrorist problem and should therefore be attacked  . 
Powell said that Wolfowitz was not able  to justify his belief that Iraq was behind 9/11 . 
" Paul was always of the view that Iraq was a problem that  had  to be dealt with  , " Powell told us  . " 
And he saw this as one way of  using this event as a way 0  to deal with the Iraq problem  . " 
Powell said that President Bush did not give Wolfowitz 's argument " much weight . " 
Though  continuing  to worry about Iraq in the following week , Powell said 0 *?* , President Bush saw Afghanistan as the priority . 
President Bush told Bob Woodward that the decision  not to invade Iraq was made  at the morning session on September 15 . 
Iraq was not even on the table during the September 15 afternoon session , which  dealt solely with Afghanistan . 
Rice said that when President Bush called her on Sunday , September 16  , he said 0 the focus would be on Afghanistan , although he still wanted plans for Iraq should the country take some action or the administration eventually determine that it had been involved  in the 9/11 attacks . 
At the September 17  meeting , there was some further discussion of " phase two " of the war on terrorism . 
President Bush ordered the Defense Department  to be ready  to deal with Iraq if Baghdad acted against interests , with plans to include  possibly occupying Iraqi oil fields . 
Within the Pentagon , Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz continued  to press the case for  dealing with Iraq . 
 Writing to Rumsfeld on September 17 in a memo headlined *  "  Preventing More Events , " he argued that if there was even a 10 percent chance that Saddam Hussein was behind the 9/11 attack , maximum priority should be placed  on  eliminating that threat . 
Wolfowitz contended that the odds were " far more " than 1 in 10 ,  citing Saddam 's praise for the attack , his long record of involvement in terrorism , and theories that Ramzi Yousef was an Iraqi agent and Iraq was behind the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center . 
The next day , Wolfowitz renewed the argument ,  writing to Rumsfeld about the interest of Yousef 's co-conspirator in the 1995 Manila air plot in  crashing an explosives - laden plane into headquarters , and about information from a foreign government regarding Iraqis ' involvement in the attempted hijacking of a Gulf Air flight . 
Given this background , he wondered why so little thought had been devoted  to the danger of suicide pilots  ,  seeing a " failure of imagination " and a mind-set that  dismissed possibilities . 
On September 19 , Rumsfeld offered several thoughts for his commanders as they worked on their contingency plans . 
Though he emphasized the worldwide nature of the conflict , the references to specific enemies or regions named only the Taliban , al Qaeda , and Afghanistan . 
Shelton told us 0 the administration reviewed all the Pentagon 's war plans and challenged certain assumptions underlying them , as any prudent organization or leader should do . 
General Tommy Franks , the commanding general of Central Command , recalled  receiving Rumsfeld 's guidance that each regional commander should assess what these plans meant  for his area of responsibility . 
He knew 0 he would soon be striking the Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan . 
But , he told us 0 *?* , he now wondered how that action was connected  to what  might need  to be done  in Somalia , Yemen , or Iraq  . 
On September 20 , President Bush met with British Prime Minister Tony Blair , and the two leaders discussed the global conflict ahead . 
When Blair asked about Iraq  , the President replied that Iraq was not the immediate problem . 
Some members of his administration , he commented 0 *?* , had expressed a different view , but he was the one responsible for  making the decisions . 
Franks told us that he was pushing independently  to do more robust planning on military responses in Iraq during the summer before 9/11 : - a request 0 President Bush denied  ,  arguing that the time was not right . 
  also began  dusting off plans for a full invasion of Iraq during this period , Franks said 0 *?* .  
The commander told us 0 he renewed his appeal for further military planning 0  to respond to Iraqi moves shortly after 9/11 , both because he personally felt that Iraq and al Qaeda might be engaged  in some form of collusion and because he worried that Saddam might take advantage of the attacks  to move against his internal enemies in the northern or southern parts of Iraq , where the United States was flying regular missions  to enforce Iraqi no - fly zones  . 
Franks said that President Bush again turned down the request . 
 Having issued directives 0  to guide his administration 's preparations for war , on Thursday , September 20 , President Bush addressed the nation before a joint session of Congress . 
" Tonight , " he said *?* , " we are a country awakened * to danger . " 
The President blamed al Qaeda for 9/11 and the 1998 embassy bombings and , for the first time , declared that al Qaeda was " responsible for  bombing the Cole . " 
He reiterated the ultimatum that  had already been conveyed  privately . 
" The Taliban must act , and act immediately , " he said  . 
" They will hand over the terrorists , or they will share in their fate . " 
The President added that America 's quarrel was not with Islam : 
" The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends . ; 
it is not our many Arab friends . 
Our enemy is a radical network of terrorists , and every government that  supports them . " 
Other regimes faced hard choices , he pointed out 0   
" Every nation , in every region , now has a decision 0  to make   
Either you are with us , or you are with the terrorists . " 
President Bush argued that the new war went beyond Bin Ladin . 
" Our war on terror begins with al Qaeda , but it does not end there , " he said  . 
" It will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found , stopped , and defeated  . " 
The President had a message for the Pentagon , : " The hour is coming when America will act , and you will make us proud  . " 
He also had a message for those outside the United States . 
" This is civilization 's fight , " he said 0  . 
" We ask every nation  to join us . " 
President Bush approved military plans  to attack Afghanistan in meetings with Central Command 's General Franks and other advisers on September 21 and October 2 . 
 Originally titled *  " Infinite Justice , " the operation 's code word was changed  : -  to avoid the sensibilities of Muslims who  associate the power of infinite justice with God alone : - to the operational name still used * for operations in Afghanistan , : " Enduring Freedom . " 
The plan had four phases . 
In Phase One , the United States and its allies would move forces into the region and arrange  to operate from or over neighboring countries such as Uzbekistan and Pakistan . 
This occurred in the weeks following 9/11 ,  aided  by overwhelming international sympathy for the United States . 
In Phase Two , air strikes and Special Operations attacks would hit key al Qaeda and Taliban targets . 
In an innovative joint effort ,  and Special Operations forces would be deployed   to work together with each major Afghan faction opposed * to the Taliban . 
The Phase Two strikes and raids began on October 7 . 
The basing arrangements contemplated * for Phase One were substantially secured  : - after arduous effort : - by the end of that month . 
In Phase Three , the United States would carry out " decisive operations "  using all elements of national power , including ground troops ,  to topple the Taliban regime and eliminate al Qaeda 's sanctuary in Afghanistan . 
Mazar-e-Sharif , in northern Afghanistan , fell to a coalition assault by Afghan and forces on November 9 . 
Four days later the Taliban had fled from Kabul . 
By early December , all major cities had fallen to the coalition . 
On December 22 , Hamid Karzai , a Pashtun leader from Kandahar , was installed  as the chairman of Afghanistan 's interim administration . 
Afghanistan had been liberated  from the rule of the Taliban . 
In December 2001 , Afghan forces , with limited support , engaged al Qaeda elements in a cave complex called *  Tora Bora . 
In March 2002 , the largest engagement of the war was fought  , in the mountainous Shah-i-Kot area south of Gardez , against a large force of al Qaeda jihadists . 
The three - week battle was substantially successful , and almost all remaining al Qaeda forces took refuge in Pakistan 's equally mountainous and lightly governed frontier provinces . 
As of July 2004 , Bin Ladin and Zawahiri are still believed  to be at large . 
In Phase Four , civilian and military operations turned to the indefinite task of what the armed forces call  " security and stability operations . " 
Within about two months of the start of combat operations , several hundred operatives and Special Forces soldiers , backed * by the striking power of aircraft and a much larger infrastructure of intelligence and support efforts , had combined with Afghan militias and a small number of other coalition soldiers  to destroy the Taliban regime and disrupt al Qaeda . 
They had killed or captured about a quarter of the enemy 's known leaders . 
Mohammed Atef , al Qaeda 's military commander and a principal figure in the 9/11 plot , had been killed  by a air strike . 
According to a senior officer who  helped  devise the overall strategy , the provided intelligence , experience , cash , covert action capabilities , and entrance to tribal allies . 
In turn , the military offered combat expertise , firepower , logistics , and communications . 

Zoot Suit style of suit worn * by African Americans , Filipino Americans , and Mexican Americans during the 1930s and 1940s . 
In Chicano culture this style of dress is primarily associated  with the pachucos of the 1940s . 
The fashion at that time was  to wear very baggy pants with pegged legs , long jackets with high and sharp shoulder pads , thick - soled shoes , and long watch chains dangling from the belt . 
An addition to the whole style common to Chicanos was a particular haircut , long with a ducktail and a wide-brimmed hat . 
The word zoot was known  within the urban jazz culture of Harlem , and it meant something either exaggerated in performance or in style . 
Many African Americans wore an extravagant style of clothing , the baggy pegged pants and jackets with padded shoulders , that  later became known  as the zoot suit . 
In the novel Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison , he describes the zoot--suiters ’ style , “  walking slowly , their shoulders swaying , their legs swinging from their hips in trousers that  ballooned upward from cuffs fitting snug about their ankles ; their coats long and hip-tight with shoulders far too broad * to be those of natural western men ” 1947 , 380 . 
In the late-night jazz scenes of Harlem this style was “ a killer-diller coat with a drape-shape , reat-pleats and shoulders padded * like a lunatic ’s cell ” 380 . 
Tyler makes the point that the zoot suit was an extremely symbolic costume , which  gave the wearer the look of a child in adult clothing . 
The broad square shoulders gave a macho look to the youth , and the finger-tipped coat was made  for fun and leisure . 
The long baggy pants were made  for dancing , especially the jitterbug , and the wide Panama hats were another sign of adulthood . 
“ The business of fun , dancing and dating were the key characteristics displayed * by Zoot-Suiters . 
It was an escape from drudgery and futile labor to the bliss of free-wheeling movement in the city among youths in the new youth culture ” Tyler , 23 . 
Prominent black entertainers  wore the zoot suit , such as Cab Calloway , Sammy Davis Jr, and Duke Ellington . 
Ellington performed at the Orpheum in Los Angeles in 1941 and 1942 with a musical  called *   Jump for Joy in which the performers wore zoot suits , also known * as  Gone with the Wind suits , after the style worn * by Clark Gable in the movie by the same name  . 
Even though the zoot suit was worn  by the young men of several different races and ethnicities , it is primarily identified  with the pachucos of Los Angeles . 
Pachucos were mostly second-generation Mexicans , the sons of migrant laborers and working-class immigrants . 
Pachucos created their own subculture , an arrogant style of dressing , a bilingual secret argot , and for some individuals membership in petty criminal gangs . 
The zoot suit became a symbolic disguise that  identified the zoot-suiter as neither a Mexican nor an American . 
It was not a bicultural or binational position , but rather a position between cultures , a “ hanging in space ” position . 
The overly confident , slow swagger of the pachuco ,  today exemplified  by the cholo , made it appear in fact as if the zoot-suiter were walking on air . 
During the summer of 1943 the attention of the whole country was on Los Angeles when gangs of sailors and zoot-suiters battled with each other in the streets of the city  . 
It  is unclear if this was a race riot or a riot of patriotic sailors who  attacked , beat , and stripped young Mexican Americans whom they perceived  to be unpatriotic zoot-suiters . 
Between the third and thirteenth of June zoot-suiters were open targets . 
Much has been written  about these riots from both literary and historical perspectives . 
During the late 1970s the zoot suit received wide recognition and popularity with the production of a successful play by Luis Valdez . 
In 1981 a film by the same name , Zoot Suit , was produced and directed  by Luis Valdez , with performances by actors Daniel Valdez and Edward James Olmos . 
 See also Cholos ; Pachucos 
References Barker 1950 ; Cosgrove 1989 ; Ellison , 1947 ; Mazon 1984 ; Sanchez 1978 Orona-Cordova 1992 ; Stone 1990 ; Tyler 1994 ; Valdez 1992 ; Zoot Suit 1981 
Zozobra giant , forty - foot effigy in the form of a puppet , which  is burned  during the annual Santa Fe Fiesta held * in Santa Fe , New Mexico . 
The word Zozobra translates to “ gloom ” or “ worry ” or “ anguished . ” 
The Zozobra is ritualistically burned  at the beginning of the fiesta , which  symbolizes the end of destructiveness , gloom , and worry ,  setting the tone for a successful fiesta . 
The creation of Zozobra was introduced  into the fiesta in 1926 by Will Shuster , who  felt that the fiesta had become “ dull and commercialized . ” 
Throughout the years the image of Zozobra changed from a simple twenty - foot puppet to the elaborate forty - foot figure with animated eyes , arms , and mouth that he is  today . 
In 1969 Shuster turned over the responsibility and copyright of Zozobra to the Kiwanis Club of Santa Fe . 
He is hung  on a tall pole on a hill , outside the city , where the burning can be seen  by the thousands of people who  come  to watch  . 
The death of gloom is supposed  to resurrect happiness . 
In response to the tradition of the burning of Zozobra , a group of New Mexico Chicanos started a tradition of * burning El Kookoóee , a figure known * by many Chicanos as the bogeyman , during the Festival de Otoño . 
 See also El Kookoóee ; Santa Fe Fiesta 

      
Case Number  , et al, Plaintiffs vs.   ;      , Defendants 
 
     
Before : , 
Date : September 28 , 
Place : Courtroom Number 2 , 9th Floor Federal Building Walnut Street Harrisburg , Pennsylvania 
  : , , , , For Plaintiffs , , , For Defendants 
Lori Shuey ,  , Official Court Reporter 
 
 
For Plaintiffs : Julie Smith Christy Rehm Beth Eveland 
 The following discussion occurred in chambers :   
 Let 's go on the record . 
We are in chambers , and this is the matter of Kitzmiller , of course , versus Dover Area School District . 
We have assembled as  planned  with respect to the issue of certain subpoenas that  have been issued  to reporters Joseph Maldonado and Heidi Bernhard-Bubb . 
Present in chambers are  counsel for both the plaintiffs and the defendants , and in addition to that ,  let me ask that you enter your appearances specially , presumably as counsel for the individuals 0 we referred to  in our orders collectively as " reporters . " 
I  'm here , Niles Benn , on behalf of both of the reporters , Heidi Bernard-Bubb and Joseph Maldonado . 
And with me is  Terance Barna , an attorney in my office , as well . 
All right . 
Now , previously , on September 12th , the Court entered an order which  went to the motion for reconsideration . That related specifically to -- filed * by the reporters . 
That went specifically to our August 2nd order which  , in effect , said that the reporters would have  to testify at certain depositions . 
Subsequently , the reporters were , if memory serves , approximately eight days ago , subpoenaed   to testify  by the plaintiffs in the case-in-chief . 
Yet another motion  to quash or for alternative relief was filed  by the reporters through Mr. Benn 's office . 
By our order of last Thursday -- the date escapes me , I think 0 it was Thursday -- the Court denied relief in that matter . 
The Court was advised  that yesterday , on September the 27th , the reporters , both of them , showed up at the appointed times for their depositions as  appropriately scheduled  by the defendants , and I 'm advised  -- and I 'll correct this if I 'm wrong -- that both reporters cited the reporter 's privilege that they consider  to exist under the First Amendment so that they would not answer any questions at those depositions . 
We 're brought  here today by that , as well as the fact that I presume 0 you 're here because the reporters have been properly subpoenaed   to appear in the plaintiffs ' case-in-chief . 
Now , have I mischaracterized anything from your standpoint ? 
No , everything that you said  is correct , Your Honor . 
Now , the most salient question then is , with respect to the reporters ' appearance today , is it  your understanding that the reporters are intending  to invoke the same privilege cited * by them yesterday , if  called    , when  called     ,  to testify by the plaintiffs ? 
Yes . 
All right . 
But that 's the reason why I had asked if we could have this conference  . 
The floor is yours . 
Thanks . 
I 'm not here  to discuss law . 
I think 0 we have discussed the law ad nauseam with respect to briefs , argument . 
I certainly understand the opinion and orders that  have been rendered  by the Court , and I appreciate them . 
And I do n't want there to be a misunderstanding in terms as to this case being wrongly focused  . 
And what I mean  by that , with regard to all of you in this room is that we 've got approximately 40 people from the media that  are observing this trial in the courtroom , plus outside of the courtroom . 
In  speaking for myself , it  would be my humble opinion that if these parties were called  to the stand  to testify and refuse  to testify , as I just indicated *?* to you , Your Honor , that I think 0 the focus of this trial all of the sudden is n't addressed  as to intelligent design , but rather the media is going  to be very much concerned in terms as to these stringers , not full-time employees , not employees at all , standing up for what they think 0  is right . 
And I really truly believe in my heart of hearts 0 the focus gets misdirected  . 
I really truly do mean that , because I do n't think 0 that should be the focus of this case . 
As a result of that , Mr. Barna and I have spent days in an effort  to try  to see if there was a means by which we could somehow ameliorate the problem  so that , in a certain sense , everybody gets what they want  . 
I clearly will not get what I want  , because at the end of the day , if I agree that my reporters are going  to testify  predicated  upon something that I want  to propose  here , that 's more than I would want , because I stand by the fact  and they stand by the fact  that there 's a reporter 's privilege here . 
They refuse  to testify at a deposition , and my suggestion to them was that if we were capable of  resolving something as a result of this conference , that they would then attend a deposition , because I believe 0 the defendants would have a right  to cross-examine them or otherwise examine them prior to them taking the stand . 
And based upon that , they would then testify in court . 
But we have several issues . 
One is that when we filed our motion  to quash last week  , quite honestly , we thought 0 we did it in a timely fashion because we filed it only after we were served  with the subpoena . 
Your Honor summarily dismissed that motion  to quash , so , in effect , if my reporters were  to be called upon   to testify today by the plaintiffs , they 're undressed . 
They 've got no protective order at all . 
They 're just regular people . 
Because the order 0 I believe that you had previously entered  related to the deposition and not related to their appearance in court . 
So that raises an issue for us because clearly we would otherwise object to them taking the stand under the order as it currently exists or the motion that you 're -- your position that the motion  to quash could not stand . 
I interpret the order and the amended order  to mean that Your Honor , in a sense , has addressed them as fact witnesses . 
I do n't think 0 you actually come out and use the word " fact witnesses , " but as one reads the order , that 's the implication . 
And you initially had indicated that you did not feel that the reporter 's privilege stood in this kind of a case . 
These two newspapers respectively go to approximately 89 municipal meetings in terms of different municipalities and school districts . 
And ironically -- in a sense , I have  to commend both Mr. Maldonado and Ms. Bernard-Bubb because , again , they 're paid  per story . 
They get anywhere between $ 40 and $ 50  a story . 
They might make $ 300 , $ 400  a week if they write number of stories , and that 's it . 
And the stories that they write  predominantly are municipal stories . 
She 's a full-time mom . 
She 's breastfeeding . 
She has a seven - month old child , and so she works at night when her husband is at home  . 
He 's a schoolteacher . 
Mr. Maldonado owns a little deli in the market in York , and he home-schools his son , his youngest son who  has learning disabilities . 
And he 's been doing that for the last three years . 
So this is just supplemental income to them because they 're not very wealthy people . 
But yet without a lot of education in terms of journalism , they believe that what they 're standing for  is the right thing . 
I do n't have control over them as I would *?* an employee of the Daily Record or the Dispatch because they are stringers and independent . 
So  having said that , their fear is that because of all those municipalities that they cover  and the school districts that they cover  , that at least in the Middle District Court , should a matter  come up similar to this case , then they are exposed  as a fact witness . 
I 've related to them , quite frankly , 0 this is the first case 0 we 've ever had  in federal court in the years that I 've been doing newspaper law  , and most of our cases are in county courts , and so , you know , there 's a different issue there . 
But  having said that , the concern that I have  is that there is a precedent being set * in the counties that these people otherwise work  . 
So how do I make it better  ? 
Well , we provided an affidavit , and that affidavit indicated that we , if  called upon   to testify , would validate the authenticity of the articles that  were written  . 
We did that , in effect ,  to offer to both sides so that we would n't otherwise have  to testify . 
 Accepted  by the plaintiffs ,  not accepted  by the defendants . 
Defendants wanted  to have the right of cross-examination . 
And at the time when you wrote the original order  and you used the words " perceived , saw , and heard  , " we were concerned  , as you well know *?* , with the word " perceived " in terms as to what  's the thought process . 
And there was dialogue on the phone amongst all of us , and you made it  very clear that you did not want any testimony that  would otherwise relate to biases and prejudices . 
And , in fact , when you reviewed the notes of the reporters  , you had also indicated that your review of Heidi Bubb 's notes and the e-mails clearly evidence that there was no bias in the writings , those writings . 
The concern that we currently have  is that the order reads , in effect , that they have  to testify as fact witnesses ,  predicated  upon my interpretation , as to what  is otherwise unpublished material so that , for example --  just using this for example . 
That 's not my intention . 
No , no , but I -- 
Well , that 's not my intention . 
And I wanted  to let you go as far as you could *?* , and I think 0 I have  to interject and I want  to interject and I want  to be clear , because I think 0 it  's important that I do that . 
 Let me address a couple points that you made  . 
First of all , I understand  and deeply respect  the position that you 're in  in this case . 
And by  saying that the motion was untimely , it was not legally untimely , it was untimely in my view only in the sense that it came , as I said *?* , on the eve of trial , when we knew that there was going  to be an issue with respect to their testimony at trial  . 
It was an attempt  to bring this to a head . 
It was successful in that respect . 
It was not successful in  solving the problem , but it was successful to  bringing it to a head . 
So to that extent , I succeeded ,  good , bad , or indifferent . 
With respect to the point that you made  as it relates to their testimony at trial , that is a very valid point . 
However , I will tell you that the sense of my opinion as it related to their deposition testimony and as  reconsidered  and as  honed  in the reconsideration , was that it was meant  to apply -- the general thrust of that , the protections , if you will , in that opinion were meant  to apply in the same sense to their testimony at trial , if they chose  to testify , and they would be protected  in every way by the Court , and they would not be questioned  in the broader sense . 
So it would not revert back to an unprotected realm , if you will , at the time of trial . 
 To be as clear as I can be *?* , at issue in this case -- and I ca n't particularly be concerned about precedential value . 
I understand your concern in that regard . 
I have  to try this case the best way that I know how . 
The concern in this case , and it is a vital concern by all parties , is that we have , as you well know *?* ,  to restate the obvious , we have newspaper articles within which there are quotes from individuals  . 
Those quotes go , at least in one sense , to the purpose behind the policy that  was enacted  by the Dover School Board . 
The simple issue here , because it  is the Court 's understanding that these individuals have denied that they made these remarks , is from the plaintiffs ' standpoint how can they get something that  is , in my view , on the purpose test , which  clearly goes to the truth of the matter asserted   , how do they get these newspaper articles into evidence  ? 
Well , they ca n't *?* , in my view , without the reporters testifying . 
The defendants might say that even with the reporters testifying , they ca n't get them in . 
I think 0 that 's their argument . 
But at the very least , in my view , and I think 0 the plaintiffs might agree with this , the reporters would have  to testify . 
I did n't say this strictly in the opinion , perhaps , but my opinion was not meant  to allow the testimony of the reporters to go in any way , in particular , outside the four corners of the affidavits rendered * by the reporters . 
I ca n't say that to the word , and that 's why the opinions were crafted  the way that they were *?*   . 
The Court has  to have some discretion on the questioning . 
But I was as clear  as I could possibly be *?* that what  is at issue here would be , for example , the particular events that the reporters wrote about  and questions such as -- simple questions , did they attend the meeting , did they hear them say the comments , did they write the story immediately after , did they take notes at the time of the meeting . 
I thought 0 my opinion was clear in that regard , and as you appropriately characterize *?* , no questions as to bias or motivation or reasons 0  to misrepresent quotes  would be allowed  in . 
There I believe 0 we would decidedly fly in the face of established case law . 
I did not view   and do not view   the law as  providing that there is some exhaustion requirement , although I understand 0 some cases have said that . 
In this particular fact situation -- and I do think , I will say , 0 on the issue of precedent , you can distinguish cases of -- and I 'm not so sure 0 I would be as fearful as some might be *?* as to precedential value . 
I think 0 this case is somewhat distinguishable , and I do n't know that a judge in another situation would knee-jerk allow this type of testimony . 
We are in a very unique situation here , and that 's what we have  . 
Finally , the last thing that I want  to do  : - I 'm answering soliloquy with soliloquy here . 
I 'm not sure if this is a dialogue . 
Finally , I am acutely cognizant of the fact that this trial has abundant media coverage , and it  is surely not my intent  to force a constitutional confrontation with two reporters and to create a side show that we do n't need  to *?*  . 
That 's why we 're meeting in chambers  . 
But I 'll tell you that if it  's their persistent position that they do n't want  to testify , then we 'll go on the record -- now , I 'm not going  to put them on the witness stand . 
I do n't think 0 it  's necessary  to do that . 
I would bring you and the reporters , I will tell you , to the bar . 
I will swear them in , I will have them sworn  in . 
I will ask you the question whether they 're going  to testify . 
I will allow them to speak for themselves on that point , and then we 'll decide what we 're going  to do  at that point . 
I do n't know what else  to do  , but I 'm not going  to go through the charade of  having them take the stand and assert , you know , as articulately as they can *?* the privilege that they believe that they can avail themselves of  . 
That 's fine . 
I interrupted you , but I think 0 it  was necessary  to do that . 
Well ,  let me share with you why I have the issue that I have   . 
About a week and a half ago I had a telephone dialogue with Eric because I had proposed to Eric the possibility that in light of your most current order and because you took out the issues of biases and things of that nature and because we 're going  to be called  to trial by Eric , that maybe he should be speaking to Pat  to see whether they would be willing  to accept the affidavit in lieu of the testimony . 
I think 0 we 're beyond that . 
Well , and then what  happened was , 0 we had a conference call , Eric , Pat , several others in Pat 's office and myself and Terry . 
They indicated that they would not *?* . 
And then in the course of that conversation , the defendants counsel had stated , for example , we would like the opportunity  to ask if they heard Mr. So and So say something , why did n't they write that  . 
That 's what I 'm concerned about  with respect to -- 
I 'm not going  to allow that question . 
But you were n't at the deposition ,  meaning 0 you do n't know that that question would n't be allowed  and quite frankly yesterday you were in trial . 
I said , though , very clearly in the last order , I thought , in the September 12th order , that I would be available . 
And I thought , when I heard that the reporters , quite frankly , appeared for depositions  , that when I was on a break  , I was going  to hear an accumulated list of questions that  were objected to  and that I would have  to rule on those questions . 
Now , I do n't have time  to preside over a deposition at this late date . 
And I know that you respect that . 
You 're experienced counsel and you know that . 
I do know from my private practice experience that I was extremely loathed  to get a judge on the telephone in mid-deposition . 
That could be one of the most unhappy experiences that a lawyer would have  . 
You got it . 
Depending on the time of day and the personality of the judge . 
Especially after your last opinion on my case , I do n't want  to call you at all . 
As you see *?* , I 'm far more genial than I express in writing . 
What I invited  by that opinion , though , was that I would be available -- and I believe 0 in an issue that  is as important to the reporters and to you , as their counsel , as this , it  is appropriate for you to stop a deposition on a question like that , instruct your witness  not to answer , and allow the Court to rule on it . 
I was inviting you  to do that . 
Now , I understand what your reasons  are  for  not doing that , and I think 0 you can do that . 
Now , if you 're telling me that you have problems with certain anticipated questions but not others and if you 're telling me that the reporters would not exercise the privilege if they were kept  roughly within the confines of their affidavits -- 
I go beyond that . 
I 'm willing  to have them testify as to what they wrote  in the article and basically forget the affidavit . 
That 's fine . 
That means everything that  's set  forth in that article . 
Well , then I think 0 we 've clarified that point . 
Then I think 0 you should reschedule the depositions and try  to do that . 
Well , if I can interject -- I mean , this is kind of like my last hurrah . 
We could only hope not . 
It depends what  happens next week . 
Because we do n't have an order with respect to trial testimony -- and we do n't *?* , except for the fact that , again , they 're naked . 
I 'll produce that order , if necessary . 
Well ,  let me share with you where I 'm coming from  , because I think 0 what I 've done  here -- and obviously I ca n't do your job . 
But what I 'm proposing  here , if you could just evaluate it . 
Depending how long this trial goes  , you might be my guest in terms of  doing my job . 
All 0 I 'm doing  is adding something to what it is  that you basically have already written  . 
And if I could just read this . 
You have no idea how long it  took us to write this  . 
Because I think 0 it does exactly what you just said  . 
It says , Wherein an affidavit is provided  in lieu of testimony  to support a newspaper article or newspaper articles  , the reporter shall be obligated   to testify as to the facts set * forth in the articles , i.e, what  was seen and heard  as  related  in the newspaper articles . 
By  doing so , the reporters would be verbalizing the contents of said affidavit -- I think , actually , 0 they were your words when we had the telephone conference  -- by  testifying as to what  appears in the newspaper article or articles , unless such affidavit is otherwise accepted  by all parties as  validating and authenticating the contents of the newspaper article or articles in issue . 
 Meaning 0 if they accept it , it becomes moot . 
However , no testimony shall relate to unpublished material or information or to the reporters ' motivations , bias , mental impressions , or other information extrinsic to what the reporter saw and heard  , and the reporter shall not be obligated   to reveal any confidential sources . 
What I 've tried  to do  here is  to say , they 'll testify as to everything that  appeared in those articles . 
And how I then distinguish this case from maybe my next case  is , where an affidavit is provided   and the Court or the parties do n't accept the affidavit  . 
What I 've done  is , it says that there 's no extraneous unpublished material questioning . 
That 's the clarity that I need  . 
And then , quite frankly , my mindset is , if the issue of the defendants is that we were biased  in our reporting because we either misquoted somebody or whatever , well , this is n't a jury trial . 
You 're trying this case . 
You 're either going  to believe the reporters or you 're going  to believe Mr. Buckingham or Mr. Bonsell or whomever when they say , I did n't say that  . 
But my concern is that I have  to have some degree of certainty  by your order that they ca n't ask any questions as to unpublished materials . 
Are you suggesting that this language should apply to both the depositions and the trial testimony ? 
 Meaning 0 if you could adapt language similar to this for the trial testimony and I agree , I have no problem in them being at a deposition prior to trial with the same kind of language relative to that . 
I will appear at a deposition prior to trial . 
I would like  to do that , because of my own health conditions , maybe on Friday  in terms as to a deposition , if that works within anybody 's schedule , and then maybe the latter part of next week . 
Because what I did  was , I put my surgery off until next Friday  to get this done  . 
Well , the problem Friday , I assume 0 you fellows are getting out of here on Friday , but I 'm not sure of that . 
Or we could do it Monday . 
I mean , whatever  works . 
Well , we do have Friday morning off . 
Right . 
Although you may have something scheduled  in terms of pretrial planning . 
I 'm not sure . 
Do you know ? 
I have a plane flight . 
I was not going  to be here . 
Do we need the whole team ? 
I was the one going * to take the deposition . 
Yeah , Ed was there yesterday . 
Alternatively ? 
Well , we 'll do what we have  to do  . 
Scheduling usually is n't my pay grade , but , you know , you can figure that out . 
 Go ahead . 
Judge , if I may *?* , there are some things here that we can agree with  , but there are others that we ca n't *?*  . 
And this is why , in our opinion , Judge . 
You know , if our clients are believed  , the reporters did talk to them but took misrepresentative statements so that they left things out  to put them in a false light and in  so doing have created articles that , if they were admitted  for the truth of the matter asserted * ,  would be misrepresentative . 
Well , that 's what I 'm not going  to get into  . 
And I understand  and I respect  that argument . 
But I think 0 I 've got  to line-draw here someplace . 
And I understood that argument before . 
And what I do n't want  to do  here is  turn this into an oral argument on things that I 've already decided  . 
And I know 0 you respect that . 
I think 0 there is a privilege here , and I think 0 the privilege sometimes gets drawn  in what  appears  to be an ad hoc manner . 
But my job is  to find where  to put the line down in this case  . 
 To traipse into the area of why they selectively used a quote as  opposed  to  not using other things that  were said   I think is  to get on a very slippery slope . 
It really almost precipitates a bias line of questioning , and I 'm not going  to allow it . 
I am trying  to narrowly draw this . 
I understand that that 's not what the defendants want  in this case , but I do n't think 0 it 's called for  . 
And , as a matter of fact , I think 0 if I did that and I ordered that and if -- I assume that the reporters would not testify and I would predict , 0 if it went to the Third Circuit on that basis , I would be reversed  . 
I do n't think that that 's a fair area of inquiry 0  to get into  . 
This looks artificial when you 're dealing with a fact witness  , but these are fact witnesses who  are also reporters , and I am straining  to try  to find a fair way 0  to do this  . 
I believe that to the extent -- and I 've said this now several times -- that the reporters ' testimony is necessary in order  to invoke the residual hearsay exception under Rule 807 , that the defendants have  to have an opportunity  to examine the reporters on the same topics and subjects that I would allow the plaintiffs to question them on  during their case-in-chief , nothing more and nothing less . 
So I 'm inclined  to accept this language , you know , not word for word , only to the extent where it states , rather generically , " wherein an affidavit is provided    , " I would take that sentence and simply say that affidavits have been provided  , rather than " wherein . " 
It 's somewhat artificial or a little strained as it relates to this case . 
The rest of it I do n't have any problem because I think 0 it does not do violence to my opinions . 
And this gets into a semantical exercise  to some degree but one that  is important , I understand , to the reporters . 
We have got  to cut the Gordian knot here . 
Either -- 
We can live with this , and they would testify if we had language similar to this . 
Well , my intention would be  to enter an order that  is a wrap-around order , if you will , that is , in effect , a re-reconsideration of the order on the depositions but also speaks to the trial testimony in chief . 
And it will be abbreviated  because of the time constraints on me , but we 'll issue it forthwith , and it will indicate that you 're going  to -- they 're going  to sit for depositions under those circumstances . 
Can I ask whether that would be reported  ? 
In what sense ? 
When you say " reported  , " what do you mean  by that ? 
" Reported " meaning in the books . 
Oh , published . 
When you say " reported " and you 're talking about reporters  , then I 'm thinking , I have enough work in this case . 
No , we would n't publish it , but there are reporters who  can access the / system . 
No , the reason why I 'm asking whether it would be published   , I do n't know whether your original opinion -- 
You 're worried about the precedential value . 
No , it 's not my intention  to publish it . 
I have no need . 
However , good or bad news travels fast , and in the legal realm it will be cited  by somebody someplace . 
You have no idea . 
Oh , you 'd be surprised . 
Your Honor , just in an effort  to avoid needless procedure or inquiry , if I could just get a sense for what you have  in mind and intend  by the order . 
If they show up for deposition and begin  to testify about an article about June 14th , -- 
Hypothetically ? 
Hypothetically . 
Would we be at liberty  to say , did you hear anything else , did you see anything else ? 
No , because -- and I know 0 this is difficult , but it goes like this . 
And this is the best 0 I can put it  , other than what I tried  to do  in my opinion . 
We have articles . 
We have a situation where the declarants , the quoted individuals , have apparently denied -- either denied , I guess -- I 'm not sure about this , . This is my understanding , either denied that they said what  was reported  in the articles or said that they were statements taken * out of context  . 
And they can speak for themselves . 
And that 's one of the reasons that I 'm line-drawing here  . 
They can say that , and I 'll take that under consideration . 
But from the reporters ' perspective , were they at the meeting . 
The obvious answer is yes , but they have n't answered that under oath . 
Did they hear the statement that  is included  in the article ? 
Perhaps where  were they standing  in the room , did they utilize a tape recorder for the purpose of  taking down the statement or did they use a tape recorder and did they take notes contemporaneously with the statement . 
How long after the meeting did they write their article  , did they use the tape recorder , did they use notes as it related to that statement . 
Those are the types of inquiries that  relate specifically to the contents of the article . 
 To allay Mr. Benn 's concerns , I think 0 it  is not fair game  to talk about all the other things that they heard  and why they wrote the article the way 0 they did   and why they excluded quotes  . 
I sincerely believe that that gets into journalistic integrity , and that 's problematic , and it  's not my intent  to allow that , nor would I allow any questioning on anything personal to the reporters . 
I think 0 I spelled that out in detail in the prior orders . 
We are going  to simply have them testify for the purpose of  authenticating the contents of that article , nothing more , nothing less , because I really believe that  to do more than that is  to create , I think , a precedent which  would have reporters called  -- Mr. Benn , I think , fears that even this would do that . 
I do n't share that fear . 
But  to go any further than that would mean that a reporter 's veracity could be questioned  each and every time 0 something like this comes up  . 
I strain mightily  not to have  to do that . 
That 's what I 'm talking about  . 
Now , I do n't know if that clarifies it . 
It does *?* , Your Honor , I think in large measure . 
And I would ask this  , with your leave , would it  suffice  to preserve my objection that I object here in chambers on the record ? 
That 's fine . 
And I note that , and that 's why I wanted  to do this on the record  . 
And I understand that you object to that , and I understand 0 the defendants have interposed not only this objection but they have also argued against that . 
And to the extent that this really clarifies and reasserts what I have  in my prior orders , I think 0 you 've preserved your position as it relates to that , and I understand that position . 
 Thank you . 
Anything from the plaintiffs ? 
We have no objection to the proposed modification , Your Honor . 
All right . 
So with that brief change to what  is a little bit awkward in the first sentence , the " wherein " -- and I do n't mean that facetiously , but just as it relates to this case , because this almost looks like it 's a contracted or -- 
I understand . 
I just wanted  to make   sure 0 the word " affidavit " was in there . 
We will recite that . 
We will get a clarifying order out . 
Now , for the purpose of -- because this is a very public trial . 
What 's your intention  , what are your thoughts regarding how we should address this   ? 
Because it  's known  that this is a festering controversy . 
That 's an interesting question . 
I mean , if we 're not called  today , which we 're not going  to be  , I do n't know that it really is an issue . 
We just had dialogue in chambers , the judge is going  to be entering an order , and after we receive the order , we 'll be able  to make a decision in terms of where we proceed  . 
Well , I do n't know about that . 
I think 0 you can assume , unless you doubt my word , 0 I 'm going  to issue an order -- and I 'm very serious -- I 'm going  to issue an order and that order will be forthwith . 
I would prefer that -- 
We can say that we 've restricted the order in such a fashion that we believe 0 the reporters will testify . 
If I might be so bold , that we are satisfied with the resolution . 
 Thank you . 
We expect an order that  is consistent with our understanding of an agreement that we reached  -- I will let it  to you  to address that . 
And my intention would not be  to address this again in open court this afternoon . 
We would just move on . 
You have other witnesses , I assume , 0  to present  , and we can move through this . 
I 'm simply saying 0 I do n't want wiggle room that we 're waiting  to see , because I 've had that experience now before . 
If you indicate to me as you have *?* , that this is satisfactory to you , I will indicate that we are satisfied with the prospective order that we understand 0 the Court is going  to enter  and that our clients will be testifying at deposition and at trial . 
Because I 'll adopt this , but I do n't want  to do this again . 
I understand . 
And you do n't want  to do it again , I know , I recognize . 
Your Honor , just one other clarification question . 
With regard to  asking what they saw and heard  with regard to all of the statements and the articles , I would assume 0 that 's statements made * after the gavel banged and the meeting was over . 
Some of those quotes are afterwards . 
Yes . 
But can questions be asked  as far as the context of those statements ? 
 :  Ask the question that you want  to ask  . 
When so and so said this thing  , you know , it was in response to what , what question or what else was  being talked about  when this statement was made   . 
No . 
That 's too amorphous a question . 
The issue here , I 'll restate , is the veracity of the articles themselves , did the reporter hear the statement as  reported  . 
If it was taken  out of context , we 're not going  to delve into that in this examination . 
The individual who  believes -- who  was quoted  and believes 0 the statement was taken  out of context or flatly that he did n't  or she did n't  say it and it 's inaccurate will have the opportunity  to say that during the defendants case-in-chief or at any other time during the trial . 
We 're not going to side door , you know , a bias argument by  going into context . 
Context  is a dangerous thing as it relates to what we 're doing  here . 
So , no , it 's -- we presume that the statement was likely given  to the reporter upon a question being asked  by the reporter , although it could have been volunteered  . 
That 's of no moment . 
The issue is , did the reporter hear the statement , was it reported  adequately , not was it reported  out of context , but did those words , as  quoted  , come out of that individual 's mouth . 
Now , I ca n't be any clearer than that . 
All right ? 
Your Honor , one thing 0 I might ask  , since it is perhaps likely that issues are going * to arise during the deposition , I 'm wondering if we could now attempt  to schedule the deposition at a time when everybody , including Your Honor , might be available  to intercede  . 
Well , what 's your next day that  would be available if not Friday  ? 
Monday . 
Well , Monday I 'll be in chambers in Williamsport all day . 
I can not do it Monday because I could n't get here on Sunday . 
My wife is going out of town , and I have  to watch all the kids . 
I could do it Tuesday , I could do it Wednesday . 
Tuesday and Wednesday is a Jewish holiday for me . 
I ca n't do it . 
How about tomorrow ? 
I 'm leaving tomorrow . 
Well ,  look , if it 's any weekday other than next Friday when I will not be available  -- I 'll be traveling next Friday -- I 'll be available . 
And , you know , we 'll work through that issue . 
And if you 're otherwise taking the deposition and we 're at trial , I 'll tell you that we 'll construct some mechanism -- and we kind of talked about this a little bit yesterday -- where you hold the thought if counsel instructs the reporters  not to answer because it 's a problematic question , and we can circle back and we 'll deal with that later  . 
I understand 0 those things could come up in the course of the deposition , and I 'll rule on those as I can *?* if I 'm not instantly available . 
So whether I 'm sitting at trial or not -- and likely it will be a day when I 'm sitting in trial  -- we 'll deal with it . 
How about later today ? 
You work that out . 
 Let 's get back on the record here , because we 've got people waiting and I want  to get  going . 
You 'll have  to work that out . 
But I will tell you in  concluding that if it is at night , if you do it at night , I will give you my home number , and you can contact me so we get this finished  . 
If we have  to do that , we 'll do it so we get it finished  . 
I will not attend the deposition , though . 
I stopped  doing that when I got this job  . 
Anything else ? 
No . 
 Thank you , Your Honor . 
 Thank you , Your Honor . 
 The discussion in chambers was concluded  .  
We return in session , and I want  to apologize to the assembled spectators and , of course , to the media . 
We handled a matter  in chambers that you 'll become aware of  in an effort  to resolve a problem , and I think 0 we did *?* . 
These things arise during trials from time to time . 
That is the first time that we 've had that type of matter in this trial  . 
We may have others as the trial unfolds . 
But it was a necessary exercise . 
And we try  to keep them at a minimum and we will keep them at a minimum during the trial . 
But with that , we will go back to the plaintiffs . 
You may call your next witness . 
Your Honor , the plaintiffs would call Julie Smith . 
 ,  called  as a witness ,  having been duly sworn or affirmed  , testified as  follows : 
   : 
 Please tell us your name . 
Julie Ann Smith . 
Where do you live  , Ms. Smith ? 
Honey Run Drive , York , Pa . 
And is that within the area covered * by the Dover Area School District ? 
Yes , it is *?* . 
And how long have you lived there  ? 
Fourteen years . 
Do you have any children ? 
Yes , I have two children . 
How old are they  ? 
My daughter Katherine is 16 , and my son Michael is 19 . 
Your daughter Katherine , what school does she attend  ? 
Dover High School . 
What grade is she in  ? 
She 's in eleventh grade . 
 Please tell us what you do  for a living . 
I 'm a medical technologist . 
And  please summarize for us your educational background . 
I graduated high school in 1979 , and I graduated at York College with a degree in medical technology in 1984 . 
Now , did there come  a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was considering approval of a biology textbook  ? 
Yes . 
And  tell us , when did you learn that  ? 
I learned that in June of '04 . 
And what was the basis for your knowledge  ? 
I read it in the paper . 
Do you remember what you read  ? 
Yeah , I read it in the York Daily Record , and , yes , I do remember . 
 Please tell us what you remember  learning  at that time . 
That the school district was very concerned about  approving a biology text that  did not include creationism . 
And do you remember anything else that you learned  at that time ? 
Not right off the top of my head . 
Okay . 
Did there come  a time when you learned that the school district board of directors had approved a biology text  ? 
Yes , they did in August . 
And what was the basis for you learning that at that time  ? 
I read about it in the paper . 
And did there come  a time when you learned that the school district board of directors was considering a supplemental textbook  ? 
Yes . 
And what was the basis for your knowledge of that  ? 
I learned that from the paper , also . 
And what did you learn  ? 
That they were going  to have Of Pandas and People in the classroom as a supplemental text to the biology book . 
And did you learn about where that book was going  to come from  ? 
It was donated  . 
Now , did there come  a time when you learned that the board had made a change to the biology curriculum  ? 
Yes . 
And approximately when was that  ? 
In October , I believe 0 it was  , in '04 . 
It  was in the newspaper that they were going  to be teaching their intelligent design from Of Pandas and People . 
And did you attend that board meeting ? 
No . 
And did you learn anything else from  reading the newspapers at that time ? 
Well , that they were going  to read the statement in the classroom , yes . 
Okay . 
Now , I 'd like  to ask you  to take a look in the notebook at what  's been marked  as  . 
Yes . 
Can you tell us what it is  ? 
It 's the newsletter that  came to the house in the mail that  told -- that  had the statement  included * that they were going  to be teaching  in the biology class . 
Now , do you know approximately when you received this  ? 
Well , it says 0 it was February , so I 'm assuming 0 it was February . 
Did there come  a time when --  let me withdraw that . 
Do you believe that the board 's actions in this case , the change to the biology curriculum and its other actions , have caused you harm ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And can you tell us what harm you believe that it has caused you  ? 
Late in '04 my daughter came home from school , and I was discussing kind of what  was going on in the district with her . 
And she looked at me and she said , Well , Mom , evolution is a lie , what kind of Christian are you  , anyway , which I found  to be very upsetting . 
Did you ask her why she said that  ? 
Yeah , I asked her why she said that  , and she said in school  what they had been talking about   or amongst her friends and what  's going on . 
She seemed  to be under the impression that as a Christian , she could not believe that evolution was a science that  , you know , was true . 
And how did that harm you  ? 
Well , it goes against my beliefs . 
I have no problems with my faith and evolution . 
They 're not mutually exclusive . 
No further questions of this witness . 
All right . 
 Cross-examine , Mr. Thompson . 
 Thank you , Your Honor . 
   : 
Mrs. Smith , my name is Richard Thompson . 
I represent the defendants in this case . 
And do you recall in April where your deposition was taken  by another member of the Thomas More Law Center , Patrick Gillen  ? 
Do you remember  being involved  in that deposition ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
Were you present in court for all the testimony that  has been given  in this trial ? 
No . 
When did you get to court  ? 
Tuesday morning . 
Now , whose testimony have you heard  so far ? 
I heard some of Ken Miller 's . 
I heard Barrie Callahan , Bryan Rehm . 
I heard the gentleman this morning . 
Okay . 
You were asked   to become a plaintiff in this case by the , were you not *?* ? 
No . 
Did n't someone from the call you ? 
Yes , they called me . 
But I was actually asked  by my friend at work , who  said to me , would you be interested in  having the contact you , and I said yes . 
And so the contacted you , and you agreed  to become a plaintiff in this case ? 
Yes . 
Now , will you agree with me that the policy which  is the subject matter of this lawsuit , the curriculum change in the biology for ninth grade , took place on October 18th , 2004 ? 
Yes . 
That 's when the board passed the resolution that  changed the biology curriculum  ? 
I believe so , yes . 
And that policy was implemented  for the first time in January of 2005 . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
In January , 2005 , where was your son  ? 
My son was in college . 
So he had already graduated from Dover High School ? 
Yes , that 's correct . 
And in January , 2005 , where was your daughter  ? 
She was in school . 
What grade ? 
She was in grade ten . 
So you will agree with me that this biology curriculum really only affected , as far as the statement was read  , ninth-grade biology students ? 
No , that 's not true . 
So the statement was read  to other classes ? 
No , but it would affect all the students at the school . 
Well ,  listen to my question . 
This policy provided that the statement was read  to ninth-grade biology students . 
Do you agree with that ? 
I agree 0 it was read  to ninth-grade biology students . 
Okay . 
And your daughter had already graduated from the ninth grade ? 
That 's correct . 
So at the time that this policy was implemented   , both of your children were out of the ninth grade ? 
That 's correct . 
Neither one of them would be subject to the statement being read  to them . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
Okay . 
Now , you indicated to your lawyer that you got involved because of newspaper articles that you read  ? 
That 's correct . 
Okay . 
Now , is it  an accurate statement that in the year 2004 , prior to you becoming a plaintiff in this case , you had never attended a single board meeting -- 
That 's not correct . 
-- in2004 ? 
In 2004 , that 's correct . 
Okay . 
Just  please answer my question and then your attorney can ask you  to explain if he wants  to *?* . 
So in 2004 , prior to this -- prior to you becoming a plaintiff , you never attended a board meeting in that year ? 
In that year . 
Okay . 
Before that , yes . 
In 2003 , you never attended a board meeting . 
Is that correct ? 
No , I had attended board meetings previously . 
I did n't ask you that question . 
I asked you , in 2003 , did you attend a board meeting ? 
I 'm going  to say 0 I do n't remember which board meetings I attended  . 
In -- 
Objection . 
 Arguing with the witness and beyond the scope -- 
I 'm asking questions . 
 Excuse me , and beyond the scope of direct . 
 Wait ,  wait . 
One at a time . 
 Let him finish , Mr. Thompson . 
 Finish the objection . 
Objection ,  arguing with the witness and beyond the scope of direct . 
I do n't find it beyond the scope of direct . 
It 's appropriate cross-examination . 
It 's overruled  on that basis . 
We 're getting argumentative only because I think 0 the witness and counsel are talking over each other . 
Each of you let the other finish before you start  talking . 
I apologize , Your Honor . 
There 's a great temptation  in cross-examination  to talk over *?* . 
That happens . 
So  let 's get a question on the floor . 
Why do n't you restate your question  , Mr. Thompson . 
Okay . 
  
Is it  true that you did not attend a board meeting in the year 2003 ? 
I 'm not going  to say 0 that 's not true . 
I do n't remember which board meetings I attended  . 
I did attend some before '04 . 
Is it  true that you did n't attend a board meeting in 2002 ? 
I told you 0 I do n't remember which year I -- 
I attended board meetings during the construction project , so when that was  , that 's when I was there  . 
And that was the year 2000 , was it not *?* ? 
I do n't remember . 
Mrs. Smith , I 'm going  to hand you -- 
Your Honor , may I approach the witness ? 
You may *?* . 
  
Mrs. Smith , I 'm going  to hand you what  purports  to be your deposition that  was taken  by Patrick Gillen . 
I would like you  to direct your attention to Page 13 , and I would like you  to read out loud the question that you are asked    starting with Line 18 and all the way down through that page and then  going on to the next page , Page 14 , and reading from Line 1 through Line 4 . 
And  please read it out loud . 
You want me to read out loud  starting on 18 ? 
Line that  starts with  , which  represents the question that  was asked  by Mr. Gillen , and  represents your answer . 
Would you please read it out loud . 
"  Let me just make   sure 0 I get you there and go on . 
You attended board meetings . 
 Give me a sense of which ones you attended  . 
They were not the board meetings " -- 
Now  give me your answer . 
So that the record will reflect , that was the question and now your answer ,  starting with Line 21 . 
You want me to read it ? 
Yes . 
" They were not the board meetings , and we were not discussing intelligent design . 
When I went to some board meetings  , it was several years ago . 
We were discussing the building project , and it has nothing 0  to do  with the intelligent design . " 
And then  go on to the next page , and the question that Mr. Gillen asked you   starting on Line 1 ? 
" That is all 0 I am trying  to get a sense for  . 
I am not familiar with the dates for the building project . 
Was that '03 or '02 ? " 
" Was that 2003 or 2002 , " is that right , the question ? 
That 's correct . 
Okay . 
And what was your answer  ? 
" I would say more like 2000 . " 
So was that an accurate reflection of your memory at the time that the deposition was taken   ? 
Yes . 
Okay . 
Does that  seem  right that the board meetings that you attended  prior to  being a plaintiff in a lawsuit was in the year 2000 ? 
If that 's what I said  , that 's what I recalled  at the time , yes . 
So based upon the response that you gave  to your attorney , is it  a fair statement that you began as a plaintiff in this case in December , 2004 , without  ever having personally witnessed the actions of the Dover School Board as they debated and enacted the policy on which this lawsuit is based   ? 
 : 
Objection . 
It 's compound . 
  
Can you answer that question ? 
Now ,  wait . 
She 's not going  to answer it until I rule on the objection . 
 Elaborate on your objection . 
I think 0 there are several predicates to that question . 
He asked whether you were present at any of the board meetings while they debated  and then enacted  this resolution , and I 'm not aware of any testimony that they debated the resolution . 
Well , I think 0 it  's a fair characterization that there was discussion about the policy . 
I 'll overrule the objection . 
You can answer the question . 
Do you recall the question ? 
No . 
 Let 's have the question read  back , please . 
 Previous question read  back .  
That 's correct . 
  
In fact , all of the information upon which you --  strike that . 
In fact , the information  that you were getting  about what the school board was doing  in came from newspapers . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
And I believe 0 in your deposition you indicated that you looked at the morning newspapers almost on a daily basis ? 
That 's correct . 
And when you were looking at the morning newspapers  , that you got very upset about what you read  regarding the Dover School Board and the policies that they were debating  . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
What were the two -- what were the newspapers that you were looking at  during this time  ? 
I read the Daily Record every morning . 
What about the York Dispatch ? 
Not regularly , no . 
Okay . 
So that it  would be a fair statement that even though what you were reading  in the newspapers got you upset , that you never personally attended one of the board meetings in that year ? 
That 's correct . 
There were personal issues in my life at that time where I was not able  to do that  . 
And it  is true that you never spoke to any of the members of the Dover School Board about the issues that  concerned you . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
You never called them . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
You never e-mailed them . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
Did you write letters to the editor about what the school board was doing  ? 
No . 
So that the first time that the school board would know that you were upset with their actions  is when they learned of you being a plaintiff in this lawsuit  . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
Okay . 
Now , did you ever speak to any of the teachers at Dover High School before you became a plaintiff in this case ? 
No . 
Did you ever speak to any of the reporters who  had written the stories about what the Dover School Board was doing  during this time ? 
No . 
Did you ever receive any minutes or notes about what the Dover School Board was doing  during this time ? 
No . 
You never sent anyone e-mails or any other communication regarding this issue . 
Is that a fair statement ? 
That 's a fair statement . 
In fact , one of the issues in this case is this book Of Pandas and People . 
Is that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
You never looked at the book Of Pandas and People before you became a plaintiff in this lawsuit , did you *?* ? 
I did n't feel that I could look at it . 
It was in -- I guess 0 it was in the library at the school , but I was not aware if we could go in the school library and take out books or not . 
Well , did you make any effort  to go and look at it ? 
I really was n't interested . 
Now , your attorney referred to a newsletter that you received  in February . 
Do you have a copy of that newsletter in front of you ? 
Yes . 
And I believe 0 you indicated that you thought 0 the newsletter was sent  in February , 2002 ? 
No . 
 Excuse me , 2005 . 
 Excuse me . 
Correct . 
Okay . 
Could we have that newsletter ? 
I would like you  to read from that newsletter on the top left-hand side in that box . 
 Read it out loud , please . 
" This newsletter has been produced   to help  explain the changes in the biology curriculum . 
Unfortunately , a great deal of misinformation  has been spread  regarding this policy . 
We hope 0 this publication will help those interested better understand the substance of the policy while  eliminating any misconceptions 0 some may have  about the curriculum change . 
We sincerely appreciate your understanding on this matter . " 
 Thank you . 
It was through this policy that you first learned about the statement that  was going  to be read   . 
Is that correct ? 
No , I believe -- no , I heard about it before . 
But did you actually see the statement before ? 
I do n't think so . 
So this was the first time that you saw the statement that  was going  to be read  to the students in the ninth-grade biology class  . 
Is that correct ? 
I believe so . 
Okay . 
As far as I can tell . 
And so this newsletter was actually providing information  to the residents of Dover as to what the actual newsletter was --  excuse me , what the actual statement was going  to say  . 
Is that correct ? 
Yes . 
Okay . 
So you had no problem with the fact that the newsletter was being produced  , even though you had a problem with the policy . 
Is that correct ? 
No . 
Now , there 's a bit of street wisdom , and I do n't know whether you agree with this or not , and that street wisdom is ,  do n't believe everything 0 you read  in the newspapers . 
Have you ever heard that ? 
Yeah , I 've heard that before . 
Okay . 
And so if you do n't believe everything in the newspapers , do n't you think before you became a plaintiff in a lawsuit that you should have taken some personal action  to verify whether things that  were produced  in a newspaper were really accurate ? 
I did talk to people in the district , other people in the district . 
Who did you talk to  ? 
People that I work with  , other people in the district . 
But you never even saw the policy until that newsletter came out . 
Is that correct ? 
I got my information from the newspaper , yes . 
And the newspaper . 
Now , have you ever had involvement with newspapers before ? 
Have you been interviewed  ? 
Have you been interviewed  by news reporters before ? 
No . 
But would it  be a fair statement  to say in the normal experience that newspaper reporters might spend five , ten , or fifteen minutes  interviewing a person and then only put one line of that interview in an article ? 
Objection . 
No foundation that she has any experience as  referred to  in the question . 
Do you want  to respond to that Mr. Thompson ? 
Well , I think 0 it 's common experience and it 's knowledge , it 's common sense . 
Now I think 0 we 're going afield . 
I 'll sustain the objection . 
We 're now clearly outside the scope of direct , the objection is sustained  . 
  
Well , you said that you were upset by the policy because it conflicts with your religion ? 
I said 0 I was upset about it because I did n't find a problem with it with my religion . 
It does not -- I 'm getting confused . 
I have a problem with it because my daughter came home from school and she says to me , What kind of Christian are you  , anyway ? 
So that 's why I have a problem with it  . 
If you recall your deposition -- and I certainly will give you an opportunity  to look at it if you do n't recall it -- the incident that you 're referring to  , also you received information that your daughter was a member of a Bible club . 
Right ? 
Yes . 
And up to that point , you were not even aware 0 she was a member of a Bible club . 
Is n't that correct ? 
That 's correct . 
And that it was -- she had a lot of friends who  went to Protestant fundamental churches . 
Is that correct ? 
Yes , she does *?* . 
And she received that information from her friends , her Protestant friends in school or in the Bible club . 
Is n't that correct ? 
I would assume 0 that 's where  she got her information  , from the Bible club at school . 
Plus they talked about it . 
And the fact that someone believes in intelligent design does not make that inconsistent with the Catholic faith , does it *?* ? 
I spoke to my deacon about this situation , and all 0 I know  is what he told me  . 
Is he a theologian ? 
He 's a deacon at St. Rose Catholic Church . 
Do you know if he has any particular expertise in Catholic theology ? 
Objection again . 
Beyond the scope of direct , Your Honor . 
She brought the issue  up of religion , Your Honor , and I 'm exploring that . 
Well , I think 0 it is beyond the scope  , again , the colorable scope of direct , and I 'll sustain the objection . 
This is not a deposition . 
This is testimony in the case-in-chief , and we 're afield . 
  
Now , the book Of Pandas and People , you do n't mind that book being in the library , do you *?* ? 
No , I do n't have a problem with it being in the library . 
You heard yesterday , if you attended the deposition of --  excuse me , the testimony of Mr. Rehm 's , that the science teachers , in a compromised move , had agreed  to put Of Pandas and People in the science class . 
Did you hear that ? 
Objection , Your Honor . 
 Mischaracterizes the testimony . 
In what sense ? 
I believe 0 Mr. Rehm testified that the teachers did not agree  to put the materials in the science class . 
Your Honor , my understanding in -- 
And -- 
Now ,  wait , Mr. Harvey . 
 Let Mr. Thompson speak . 
One at a time . 
Your Honor , my memory , if it serves me correct , Mr. Rehm testified that they had reached a compromise with some of the board members that they were going  to allow the book Of Pandas and People in the science classroom . 
My recollection is that he may not have used the word " compromise , " he may have used the word " concession . " 
I 'm not sure that there 's a distinction as it applies here . 
I 'll overrule the objection . 
Did you hear Mr. Rehm 's testimony yesterday ? 
Yes . 
Well , then  go ahead . 
  
Whether it 's " concession " or " compromise , " did you hear that the teachers had agreed  to put Of Pandas and People in the science classroom ? 
I do n't remember exactly what he said  yesterday . 
No further questions , Your Honor . 
All right . 
 Thank you , Mr. Thompson . 
Any redirect ? 
No , Your Honor . 
Then , ma'am , you may step down . 
That will complete your testimony . 
And I do n't think 0 we have any exhibits 0  to enter  , do we *?* ? 
That 's correct , Your Honor . 
 is already in evidence . 
You may call your next witness . 
Your Honor , the plaintiffs call to the stand Plaintiff Christy Rehm . 
 ,  called  as a witness ,  having been duly sworn or affirmed  , testified as  follows : 
Your Honor , again , may I make   sure that she has the binder of exhibits ? 
You certainly may *?* . 
   
Please  tell us your name . 
Christy Rehm . 
Are you married , Mrs. Rehm ? 
Yes . 
 Tell us the name of your husband . 
Bryan Rehm . 
Please  clarify for us one important question , and that is , exactly how old are your children  ? 
My children ? 
Yes . 
I have a 14 - year - old daughter , Alix , an eight - year - old daughter Paige , a seven - year - old son Ian , and a 15 - year - old son Lucas . 
And where does your family live  ? 
I mean your immediate family , you and your husband and your children . 
Rock Creek Drive , Dover , Pennsylvania . 
And how long have you lived there  ? 
Approximately five years . 
And had you lived in Dover previously to that in your life ? 
Yes . 
I grew up in Dover , I attended Dover High School , graduated from Dover High School . 
My family , my extended family  , lives in the Dover area , including my grandparents , my parents , and other relatives . 
My parents currently still live in the Dover area . 
And please  tell us where your children are right now in school  , the grades , please . 
Grade level , okay , yes . 
The oldest is in ninth grade , the next one is in the third grade . 
I have a first-grader , and then obviously the baby is not in school yet . 
And the oldest three children , do they attend the public schools in Dover ? 
Yes . 
Two of them , my oldest is at the high school , the Dover High School , and then I have -- the next one is at the Weiglestown Elementary School . 
And my son is hearing - impaired , so he is charged  with the education of Dover School District ,  meaning that they have  to provide his education , but he actually attends classes at a hearing-impaired classroom . 
And your daughter that  's in the ninth grade , is that at the Dover High School ? 
Yes . 
And is she taking biology now ? 
Yes , she is *?* . 
Please  summarize for us your educational background . 
As I said *?* , I graduated from Dover High School . 
I attended Lock Haven University and Millersville University . 
I received a from Millersville University in English , and I also have a degree in journalism , as well . 
I later got a teaching certification and attended Penn State University where I received my master 's degree  . 
Do you work outside the home ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
What do you do  ? 
I 'm a teacher , an English teacher . 
Where do you teach  ? 
In a public school system outside of York County . 
And what grade do you teach  ? 
High-school level , so tenth through twelfth grade generally . 
Did there come  a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was considering a change to -- was considering approval of a biology textbook  ? 
Yes . 
Do you remember when that was  ? 
It was sometime in 2004 . 
It was prior to the June meetings because my husband was a teacher at the school , so I often heard things that he would come home and tell me  . 
So I knew that there was some discussion over the biology book , so sometime before that . 
I ca n't tell you exactly when . 
Did you attend a meeting of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors on June the 7th of 2004 ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And why did you attend that meeting  ? 
Well , because , like I said *?* , my husband had been a teacher at the school , and he had sort of been directed  by the high school principal  to attend the meeting in support of the different things that  were happening . 
There were other textbooks that  were being adopted  and controversies over them , and , you know , it was sort of a rallying thing , I suppose . 
And I went along because I live in the district , I pay taxes in the district , my children attend school in the district . 
I 'm an educator , and I was curious about what  was happening . 
And can you recall anything that  happened at that meeting on June the 7th ? 
I recall a lot of things that  were happening at that meeting . 
 Please tell us what you can remember  about that meeting . 
Okay . 
Some of the -- I attended a lot of meetings , so facts blur together . 
What I do recall  , I -- as my husband said *?* yesterday , I was pregnant at the time , so I have some reason 0  to remember certain things  . 
But I recall Barrie Callahan speaking about the textbook . 
It was the first time that I had really ever been around Barrie Callahan  , so she strikes me : - that memory strikes me because my mother had known her previously . 
And she was speaking about the textbook ,  just questioning them . 
I do n't remember her exact words . 
But I do know that she was upset with them about this textbook , the textbook process , the students not having a textbook . 
Obviously it  was very distressing for her that the students in the biology class did not have a textbook . 
Do you remember if any board member spoke back to her in response to her questions ? 
Yes . 
Bill Buckingham said to her -- and I know Bill Buckingham because at the time he lived down the street from my grandparents and for many years lived there . 
And he responded to her  basically saying that there 's , you know , a problem with the textbook , it needs  to be balanced  , comments about  laced * with Darwinism , it needed  to be balanced  with creationism . 
Comments of that nature is what he had said  to her . 
Do you remember -- 
I 'm sorry . 
I 'm sorry . 
And I distinctly recall Barrie Callahan sort of throwing her hands up in the air and saying , Oh , so this is about evolution . 
That was very distinct in my mind , just her mannerisms as she said that . 
Do you recall a young man by the name of Max Pell speaking at that meeting ? 
Unfortunately I was in the restroom at the time that Max Pell was speaking  because -- my husband told you 0 I was eight months pregnant . 
I was actually nine months pregnant and due any day , so I spent quite a deal of time in the restroom . 
But I had excused myself  to go to the restroom just after Barrie did this whole thing . 
In fact , I may have been walking out of the room  at the time and in close proximity to her . 
And so at the time when Max was speaking  -- I believe that there were people who  spoke in between she and Max Pell . 
But at the time when he stood  to speak  , I was in the restroom and sort of coming back from the restroom , so I do n't really recall exactly what his comments were  . 
I know him because he was my husband 's student , though . 
Do you recall any other board members saying anything during the course of any discussion about the biology textbook ? 
Well , like I said *?* , I was reentering the room from the bathroom , so I was sort of in the doorway . 
And I obviously did n't know what Max had said  to the board but that he had spoken to the board . 
So the comments that  were coming back were , I assume , directed  at him . 
But there were comments from Bill Buckingham about brainwashing , and I remember  hearing that , the whole thing about brainwashing , because it dealt with  going to college and getting this education and students who  go to college become brainwashed . 
And I was very upset by that because I attended college and I do n't feel as if I were brainwashed  . 
And also I recall Alan Bonsell making a comment about , you know , there are only two theories , there 's this theory evolution and there 's this theory creation , and if you 're teaching only those two theories , then there 's not a problem . 
Do you recall anything else 0 Mr. Bonsell said  ? 
At this time , no . 
Do you remember anything else that  was said  by any members of the public at that meeting ? 
At that meeting . 
Currently , I do n't *?* . 
I 'd like you to take a look at what  's been marked  as Exhibit . 
It 's in the notebook in front of you . 
Just  take a moment  to look at it . 
Okay . 
Do you have that in front of you ? 
Yes . 
Have you ever seen it before ? 
This article , yes . 
Did you see it at or around the date that it was published   ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
What 's the date on it  ? 
The date is June 9th , 2004 . 
Who is the author  ? 
The author is Joseph Maldonado . 
And can you tell us what publication its from  ? 
Yes . 
It is from the York Daily Record . 
Now , did you just have an opportunity  to read it just a moment ago ? 
Just now I skimmed it , yes . 
 Take another moment  to look at it if you need  to *?* , but I would like  to know whether it refreshes your recollection about anything else that  happened at that meeting . 
Yes . 
Okay . 
 Tell us what else -- 
after  looking at that article , do you remember anything else that  happened at the meeting ? 
Yes , I do recall Bill Buckingham making comments about , you know , the apes and monkeys : -  coming from apes and monkeys . 
And I also -- 
Your Honor , again , objection . 
It appears 0 she 's going  to be reading from the article with her testimony . 
I 'm sorry . 
It  's a little hard  to do this , but we 'll sustain the objection . 
Mr. Muise 's objection is well-founded . 
 Let me explain how we can do this  , how we must do this  . 
When your counsel asks you the question  , you may review the article , take a look at it , see if it refreshes your recollection . 
It  's important that  having refreshed your recollection , if it jogs something or re-creates a memory , that you testify in answer to Mr. Harvey 's question . 
 Do not look back and read from the article as you 're testifying , please . 
All right ? 
Yes . 
Sorry . 
  
Now , do you remember anything else that  happened at that meeting ? 
Yes . 
I remember comments about our country being founded  on Christianity and  not needing  to teach the faiths of other people . 
And I remember  talking to my husband about that in the car ride home , as well , because we 're both teachers and I was -- when I hear things like that  , I immediately think of my students , and I was thinking about the diverse group of students that I have  in my classroom , who  all have different religious viewpoints , and how difficult that  would be   to tell one student that , you know , we ca n't express your belief , but we can express that person 's belief in the classroom . 
And I just find those things to be very upsetting when I hear things like that being said   . 
Now , do you remember if you attended another meeting of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors approximately a week later on June the 14th ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And why did you attend that meeting  ? 
Well , because there was n't really a clear resolution to what  had occurred the previous meeting . 
In addition , I was very angry when I left the June 7th meeting  just because of the demeanor of the school board and the things that  were being said  . 
And , honestly , I thought that maybe it would set me into labor because of , you know ,  being angry , and at that point in time I was past my due date , in addition to  caring about my children 's education and everything 0 I said  previously . 
Now ,  tell us what you can recall  of the June 14th , board meeting . 
Again , there were many , many things that  happened at that school board meeting , and I can tell you that I was very much interested in what  was being said  . 
And so I pretty well made   sure , at the beginning of that meeting , which  went on for quite a long time , that I would n't miss anything , so I took care of my bathroom needs beforehand . 
And I recall the meeting starting with Bill Buckingham sort of -- I 'm sorry , Trudy Peterman spoke about her -- actually ,  hold on . 
 Give me one second  to think about this . 
Yes , Trudy Peterman spoke . 
She was the high school principal at the time . 
And I know that she spoke because the thing that she said  seemed  very similar to her graduation speech that she had said  just previously . 
My sister had graduated that year , and I attended the commencement ceremony . 
And she had talked about Visigoths and things like that that she had spoken about  in her commencement speech . 
And essentially she was speaking up for the teachers and the biology textbook . 
And after she had spoken , Bertha Spahr also spoke , as well . 
She 's the department chairperson , and , actually , I had her as a science teacher . 
And she presented information  to the board , documents , that she and I believe 0 other members of the science department had researched on  , I guess cases that  had been set  down before on creationism in the public school system or something of that nature ,  just to show them that , you know , if they were still considering this idea , that they might , I do n't know , be met  with some litigation or something . 
After she spoke , Bill Buckingham had made a comment  to her about her -- where did she get her law degree from  . 
Can you give me one second ? 
I 'm wondering if I 'm getting my meetings mixed  up . 
Objection , Your Honor . 
This is running into a narrative . 
Well , I think 0 it 's still responsive to the question . 
Do you want  to put a question on the floor ? 
She was just thinking . 
  
Did you need  to think and change your testimony in any way ? 
I just wanted  to make   sure that I was n't getting my meetings mixed  up . 
You can finish your answer . 
Do you want  to finish the answer , or is that your answer ? 
Yes , that 's my answer . 
I 'm sorry , I recall something else , as well . 
I recall Charlotte Buckingham , who  is Bill Buckingham 's wife , speaking at that meeting , as well . 
Essentially there were a lot of people in the community who  were standing and speaking at this meeting because they wanted  to warn the school board that they were not in favor of any legal action coming against the community , against the school board . 
They were afraid for their tax dollars . 
And Charlotte Buckingham I recall  really being the only person who  got up  to stand in defense of the school board , and she was Mr. Buckingham 's wife , or is Mr. Buckingham 's wife . 
And she quoted Scripture , Old Testament , actually , all Old Testament Scripture about why the school board is right  , basically . 
And she also talked about school prayer and the need for school prayer in that speech that she had prepared  . 
In addition , Reverend Warren Eshbach stood up and spoke at that meeting , as well ,  sort of urging the school board  not to proceed with this . 
And many other members of the community spoke , as well . 
  
Did your husband speak ? 
I recall my husband speaking . 
In fact , he had n't prepared  to speak , but he was very upset , as many people in the audience were *?* , and he stood up  to speak . 
I do n't remember his exact comments , but , again , it was a warning to the school board and : - actually , not necessarily a warning , but  just sort of reiterating what science teachers do  in their science classes and how there is really no conflict here with the textbook  . 
Objection , Your Honor . 
It 's a narrative . 
The question was , did your husband speak . 
Yes , he spoke . 
My next question was going  to be simply if you could tell us what -- but I think 0 she 's already told us what she can recall 0 her husband said  . 
Well , that answered the next question . 
That moots the objection , and you can move to the next question . 
  
Do you remember Bill Buckingham speaking at this meeting ? 
Oh , yes . 
There were not many meetings where Bill Buckingham did not speak  . 
And , actually , at that meeting -- I believe 0 the beginning of the meeting was an apology   , actually , which he had prepared  in advance apologizing to the members of the community if he had said anything that  offended them . 
And it seemed to me sort of an inappropriate apology because -- or maybe " inappropriate " is not the correct word , but not a sincere apology because almost immediately after he had given his apology , he started  doing the same things that he had always done  , which  was  to demean the public , to say negative comments . 
Do you remember specifically anything 0 he said  ? 
Yes . 
He made comments like , years ago someone died on the Cross , ca n't we take a stand for Him . 
He made comments about the liberals in black robes coming and taking away our freedoms in the school . 
He made many , many comments at that meeting . 
Now , did you attend any other meetings of the Dover Area School District Board of Directors that summer ? 
No , we did n't attend that summer . 
And did you attend any meetings that fall ? 
Yes . 
Did you attend the meeting on or about October the 18th of 2004 ? 
Yes , we did *?* . 
And can you just tell us briefly what you can recall  about that meeting ? 
Well , there was -- at this point in time it was the change in the curriculum that  was being proposed  and voted on  that evening . 
And , again , this was a heated meeting . 
There were many members of the community who  stood  to speak , science department members . 
Jen Miller spoke , although I did n't really know who she was  at the time . 
I recall her speaking on behalf of her biology course . 
I recall Bertha Spahr again speaking . 
My husband again spoke at this meeting . 
And , again , other members of the community spoke at that meeting . 
Did you and your husband stay for the whole meeting ? 
No , we did n't *?* . 
Now , during the time that you were at the meeting  , did you hear any discussion among the board members about the reasons for the proposed change to the biology curriculum ? 
During the board meeting ? 
Yes . 
No . 
Did you attend a meeting the following week , on or about November the 2nd , 2004 ? 
Yes . 
And can you remember anything from that meeting ? 
Yes . 
I recall 0 Noel Weinrich who  had spoken at other meetings , as well , was upset about the vote that they had taken  and was sort of urging them  to rethink the vote . 
Do you remember anyone requesting access to -- Oh , yes  -- a tape of the October 18th meeting ? 
Yes . 
Because my husband and I had left early -- we had our infant with us and he needed  to get home -- we had heard that there were comments that  were said  after we left about teachers should be fired  if they do n't listen to the school board 's directive . 
And we wanted  to hear that for ourselves , so my husband had previously requested the tapes and then at that meeting he stood again  to request the tapes . 
In addition , Barrie Callahan had stood  to request the tapes at that meeting , as well . 
And do you remember if any members of the school board spoke in response to either your husband or Barrie Callahan with respect to the subject of the tapes ? 
Yes . 
Barrie -- I 'm sorry , Alan Bonsell said very clearly that -- Dr. Nilsen had said something   , as well , about the tapes , that it 's not policy or something like that , that this is not past practice , this is not policy , this  is not standard policy  to release tapes to the public . 
And additionally , Alan Bonsell made the comment that they could n't release the tapes because after  speaking with their solicitor , there would possibly be legal issues , ramifications if they released the tapes . 
Now , I 'd like  to just ask you just a couple more questions . 
Mrs. Rehm , do you believe that the board 's actions with respect to the change to the biology curriculum have caused any harm to you ? 
Yes , absolutely . 
And can you please tell us how you have been harmed   ? 
Well , in numerous ways . 
First , as a teacher , professionally , I feel that teachers in general  are harmed  , myself , as well , because there 's a dichotomy here in what they 're saying  about this statement that they have passed  on intelligent design as they 're not teaching it . 
On the other hand , they 've said that it enhances state standards and critical thinking . 
In my mind , everything that you do  in a classroom is teaching . 
And I do n't necessarily think 0 that 's just in my mind . 
I believe 0 that 's true of all educators . 
The way 0 I dress when I go  to work   tells my students something . 
The statements 0 I make  or the statements that I do not make  in my classroom tell my students something . 
So I think 0 we 're charged  with , you know ,  having an ethical decision 0  to make  when we walk into the classroom  , the things that we say  and the things that we do  , and so I think 0 that 's very important . 
But you ca n't say 0 when you walk into a classroom  , you 're not teaching . 
And if that  's what  's happening in the Dover school system and my children are in that school system , that they 're routinely establishing practices that  is not teaching in the classroom , then that 's shameful . 
In addition , I have a child who  is in the ninth-grade biology class , and this has spilled over into other classes . 
It 's not just the biology class that  has been affected  by this . 
My child has heard comments   from other students , school board member students in her classroom about evolution being against their religion , and do you think 0 we came from monkeys , how can you think 0 we came from monkeys  . 
It used  to be a weekly occurrence . 
It 's now a daily occurrence , and my daughter comes home from school  upset about these comments that  are being made  to her and , you know , is looking for guidance on how  to respond to these questions  . 
Also , intelligent design is not a scientific concept . 
It 's a religious concept . 
And because I do n't subscribe to that particular brand of religion , I feel that I and my daughter , my family , are being ridiculed  , and my daughter feels the pressure . 
I reserve the right  to teach my child about religion . 
And I have faith in myself and in my husband and in my pastor  to do that , not the school system . 
 Thank you . 
No further questions . 
All right . 
Before we start the cross-examination , I think 0 this will be an appropriate time for our afternoon break . 
We 'll take that break for approximately 20 minutes , no longer than that , and we will return with Mr. Muise 's cross-examination of the witness . 
We 'll be in recess . 
 Recess taken  .  
Mr. Muise , you may cross-examine . 
 Thank you , Your Honor . 
   
Good afternoon , Ms. Rehm . 
Your oldest child is 14 years old . 
Is that correct ? 
Yes . 
And your child 's name is Alix ? 
Yes . 
And Alix is presently in the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School ? 
Yes , she is *?* . 
And my understanding from your husband 's testimony yesterday is that she has n't yet reached the section in biology that  deals with evolution . 
Is that correct ? 
Yes . 
After  looking at her syllabus , it appears that evolution comes later in the course . 
I would n't say at the end , but closer to the end of the course . 
And so she has n't heard this one-minute statement be read  in the class yet ? 
She has not *?* , no . 
Now , you testified about two -- or several meetings , but two meetings in particular 0 I want  to ask you some questions about  . 
And those are the meetings that  occurred on June 7th of 2004 and then the meeting on June 14th of 2004 . 
Okay ? 
Yes . 
I believe 0 you described these meetings as  involving some heated exchanges between some board members and the public . 
Is that correct ? 
Yes . 
And it 's my sense  from your testimony that the majority of the statements that you appear  to find  objectionable were statements made * by Mr. Buckingham ? 
No . 
There were statements made * by many of the school board members that I found  objectionable . 
It 's just that Mr. Buckingham always seemed  to say very inappropriate things . 
But in addition , Alan Bonsell said very inappropriate things , and Noel Weinrich said very inappropriate things . 
It 's just that I did n't give much credit to Noel Weinrich 's comments because he would say things like , Darwin 's at least what 60 , years old , a theory becomes a theory if you say it over and over again . 
Those are the kind of things 0 he would say  . 
But they were all very outspoken . 
Now , the controversy on the June 7th and June 14th meeting was surrounding the selection of a biology textbook . 
Correct ? 
June 7th and June 14th ? 
Yes . 
Yes . 
And the biology textbook that  was in question at the time , I believe 0 it was the version of the Miller - Levine biology book . 
Is that your understanding ? 
It very well could be *?* . 
I 'm not sure what the edition in debate was  . 
But the statements that you testified to  and the controversy that you were describing  was surrounding the purchase or selection of that particular biology book for the school district . 
Correct ? 
Yes , it was definitely the Miller - Levine textbook . 
I do n't know what the edition was  or the copyright date or any of that information , but I do know that it was that biology textbook that  was being debated  very rigorously . 
And , in fact , the school district purchased the Miller - Levine biology book  to be used  as the primary text for the ninth-grade biology class . 
Correct ? 
Yes . 
And that would be the textbook that your daughter Alix will be using  ? 
Yes , with the dragonfly on it . 
She already has the book ? 
She has the book , yes . 
Have you looked through it ? 
Have I looked through the book ? 
Yes , I have looked through the book . 
Do you have any objections with the book ? 
No , I do n't *?* . 
She was n't given  a copy of Pandas and People , was she *?* ? 
No , she was not *?* . 
So the only required textbook for that class was that biology book that  was creating all the controversy on June 7th and June 14th . 
Is that correct ? 
To my knowledge , the only required book is that book , in addition to supplemental materials that the instructor has  . 
Now , you made a comment  in your direct testimony that intelligent design conflicts with your brand of religion . 
Yes . 
Is intelligent design another brand of religion ? 
No . 
What I 'm saying  is that I believe 0 intelligent design , as well as the ideas of creationism , in particular , the Young Earth creationists , which , I 'm sorry , I do n't agree with  . 
 do n't agree with the age of , you know , the earth and their opinion . 
There are things that I do not believe  . 
And I do not believe the same things as the board members who  adopted that statement . 
And so your understanding is 0 intelligent design is the same as Young Earth creationism ? 
Well , to my understanding , intelligent design just presupposes that everything in life is too complex , that it has  to be designed  . 
But I also know that creationism was used  repeatedly with the term : - or , I 'm sorry , not with the term " intelligent design . " 
Intelligent design came up after the fact . 
But I do know that , in its original context , it was creationism that  was being used  . 
And when I think of creationists  , again , I think of Young Earth creationists , and I do not subscribe to that way of thinking . 
And so , again , you 're associating Young Earth creationism with intelligent design ? 
There is a connection in my mind , yes . 
If you could be shown  that intelligent design does not require the action of a supernatural creator and , in fact , is based  on observable and empirical facts , would you change your opinion ? 
I believe that if intelligent design could be proved  to be scientific , then I would believe 0 it would belong in a science classroom . 
Would I believe it ? 
I do n't know that scientifically I 'm qualified  to say , you know , that I believe many scientific concepts because I 'm -- I 'm not a scientist . 
But I suppose that if intelligent design could follow scientific methods , then -- and it were proven  to be scientific by scientists , it was accepted  by scientific communities , then I would have no reason 0  not to accept that  . 
I want  to explore your understanding of what  has actually taken place in this ninth-grade biology class that your daughter Alix is presently taking  . 
Is it  your understanding that Darwin 's theory of evolution will be taught  in this class  pursuant to the Pennsylvania academic standards ? 
I would hope so . 
And as far as I know , that is the case , because Dover says that it is a standards - based school , and so I assume that when they say that and they say that students have  to pass certain material before they can be advanced  into new material  , that they would have  to be abiding by the state standards . 
And I take it  from your answer 0 you have no objection to that ? 
To  following state standards , no , I have no objection  . 
And so it  's your understanding that the Pennsylvania state standards require students  to learn about Darwin 's theory of evolution and eventually take a standardized test of which that theory is a part  of it ? 
Yes , the test , yes . 
And you have no objection to that ? 
To my students taking a test , well , you know , I --  being an educator , I 'm not in love with tests or standardized tests . 
But if you 're asking me if I object to my daughter taking a standardized test with that information on it , of course not . 
I would hope that they would provide lots of academic information on those tests . 
And is it  your understanding that because Dover is a standards-driven district , that they 're going  to focus their class time on  preparing students  to achieve proficiency on those standard - based assessments ? 
I 'm sorry , can you repeat that ? 
Yes . 
Is it  your understanding that because Dover is a standard - based district , the class instruction is going  to focus on  preparing students  to achieve proficiency on those standard - based tests that we were just describing  ? 
Not only is that my understanding , but that is what I would expect  . 
And you have no objection to that ? 
No , I do n't *?* . 
Is it  your understanding that because Dover is a standards - driven district , that students will not be tested  on the intelligent design theory ? 
As I know it and as it is written  , there is no test on intelligent design . 
And from your previous answer , I believe 0 you do understand that the Dover School District purchased , for its ninth-grade biology class , the edition of the Miller and Levine biology book . 
Correct ? 
Yes . 
And you have no objection to that book being used  in the class ? 
No , I do not *?* . 
Is it  your understanding that this biology book provides thorough coverage of Darwin 's theory of evolution ? 
Actually , did you ask me if it 's my understanding or if -- 
If it 's your understanding . 
I mean , you have  to testify about your knowledge , ma'am . 
Okay . 
What  I 've seen  of actually Darwin in the textbook , in my opinion , is actually quite slim . 
It follows state standards , of course . 
And , actually , to me , it gives more of a historical context of Darwin than anything as far as what I have read  . 
And I did look at that section , and I looked basically through the book . 
And it appears  to be historical mainly in context of Darwin 's time frame and what he did  for science . 
Has Dr. Miller left the courtroom ? 
Maybe we should ask . 
So if you 're asking me if I feel 0 it 's enough or if it 's -- I 'm not sure what it is  0 you 're asking  me about that . 
I feel , actually , that there are topics that  probably could be explored  in more detail , but I understand that there are limitations within any textbook that you have  to hit on core concepts . 
I believe that core concepts are covered  , but I think that , in my opinion , what I 've looked at  , it 's historical context . 
Is it  your understanding that it presents Darwin 's theory of evolution in a manner that  is consistent with its standing in the scientific community ? 
As much as I know *?* about the scientific community -- and , you know , you have  to remember 0 that 's not my discipline . 
But as much as I know *?* about what the high school science standards say  , it would be in standing with that . 
As far as the scientific community , I really ca n't go there , because I know that there is a lot more about Darwin than  is in that textbook . 
I mean , I can absolutely say that without  knowing everything about Darwin or knowing everything about science . 
Do you have any reason 0  to believe that what  's in the biology book is inconsistent with what the scientific community  -- 
Absolutely not , no . 
No , I would have no reason 0  to believe that  . 
Is it  your understanding that the book Of Pandas and People was placed  in the library for students to review ? 
Yes . 
It  's your understanding that no student was required   to read any portion of the Pandas book ? 
Right , just as no student is required   to read anything that  's in the library unless they choose  to *?* . 
You have no objection to Pandas being in the library ? 
No , absolutely not . 
I do n't object to Pandas being in the library , just like I do n't object to , you know , any of the other books being in the library , as long as -- as long as it 's the appropriate level and -- you know , I mean , there is a censorship process that  goes into  putting books in the library . 
So , I mean , as long as it has gone through that process and it 's approved  to be there , I do n't have a problem with it being there . 
The statement that the school district developed  0  to be read  as part of the biology class , is it  your understanding that the statement that  was drafted  in January , 2005 , or for use in January , 2005 , was modified  in June of 2005 ? 
Are you aware of that ? 
Can you say that again ? 
I 'm sorry , I was n't that precise . 
The original statement that  was drafted  by the Dover School District was modified  in June of 2005 . 
Are you aware of that ? 
Well , I 'm aware that that statement was modified  several times . 
In fact , there were different drafts of that statement that I had seen  . 
The exact modification , are you telling me that from the time that they had approved it in October  , it was modified  before it was read  in January ? 
Because it was again read  in , I believe , like May , and there was a change from that point in time , unless I 'm incorrect and that is the change that I 'm thinking of  . 
Were you aware that there was a change made * to the statement at one point  to indicate that Pandas was in the library , as well as additional resources in the library addressing intelligent design ? 
Yes , I am aware that there was a change . 
Are you aware of that change ? 
Yes . 
Is it  your understanding that some of these additional books that  were put  in the library are actually critical of intelligent design ? 
Actually , I am *?* , because I recall them -- an organization actually sending the library those books , because there was controversy in those books being put  in there , too . 
And there were many members of the community who  had called  to see whether those books had actually gotten there  or not , into the library , because we were n't certain that those books were going  to be allowed  in the library , permitted  in the library . 
They 're in the library ? 
Well , a parent -- the books that  are critical to -- Yes . 
I 'm assuming that they had gotten there . 
You never checked ? 
There were a couple instances where friends of mine had tried  to check on the status of the books in the library but were not permitted   to go in at that time  . 
So I am only assuming that those books are there now because I am being told  that they are *?* . 
But as for myself walking into a library and seeing them there , I did not *?* . 
Do you have any objection to these additional books being placed  in the library ? 
No , I do not *?* . 
No further questions , Your Honor . 
Any redirect ? 
No , Your Honor . 
Ma'am , you may step down . 
That will complete your testimony , and you may call your next witness . 
Your Honor , plaintiffs call to the stand Plaintiff Beth Eveland . 
 ,  called  as a witness ,  having been duly sworn or affirmed  , testified as  follows : 
 State your name and spell your name for the record . 
Sure . 
My name is Beth Eveland , B-e-t-h , E-v-e-l-a-n-d . 
   
"  Please state your name . 
Beth Eveland . 
And where do you live  , Ms -- 
is it Ms. or Mrs? 
Mrs. Mrs. Eveland . 
Colonial Road , Dover , Pennsylvania . 
And how long have you lived there  ? 
I 've lived there approximately eight years now . 
Are you married ? 
Yes , I am *?* . 
Do you have children ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
How many children do you have  ? 
Two . 
And how old are they  ? 
I have a seven - year - old daughter and a five - year - old daughter . 
And what schools do they attend  ? 
They attend the Leib Elementary School in the Dover School District . 
And do you have plans for your children to continue  to attend public schools in Dover ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And what are those plans  ? 
 To continue  keeping them , you know , going through the Dover School District . 
And do you work outside the home ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And  please tell us what you do  . 
I am a legal assistant . 
Now , did there come  a time when you learned that the Dover Area School District Board of Directors was discussing or considering approval of a biology textbook  ? 
Yes . 
And when was that  ? 
It was approximately June , 2004 . 
And do you remember how you learned that  ? 
I had read an article in the York Daily Record . 
Now , I 'd like you  to look at what  's been marked   and is in the notebook before you  as  . 
All right . 
 Excuse me , Your Honor . 
I just want  to make   sure that this testimony , to the extent 0 it relates to the newspaper article  , is subject to our standing objection . 
Well , what is 46  ? 
It 's a June 9th article from the York Daily Record . 
Well , I do n't know what the question is  . 
It may relate to your standing objection , but we 'll note that . 
We 'll hold that thought , and you can proceed with the question , because all 0 we have  is the exhibit that  is a newspaper article . 
So  let 's proceed with the question . 
There 's no need  to restate your objection , unless you want  to put a finer point on the objection . 
But at this point ,  proceed with your question . 
  
Did you read this article on or around June the 9th of 2004 ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And following  reading this article , did you attend any meeting of the Dover Area School District ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And approximately when was that  ? 
Approximately the end of June through the present . 
What I 'd like  to know  is if you attended a meeting after this June 9th --  excuse me , this board meeting that  's reported  in this article ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And what was the date of the next board meeting that you believe 0 you attended   ? 
It would have been approximately June 15th , June 16th . 
And can you tell us whether -- when you remember that you attended this board meeting  ? 
When I remember that I attended this board meeting  ? 
Yes . 
In preparation for trial ,  looking back through my deposition testimony and thinking about things that  had happened , it occurred to me that , you know , I was there at that June meeting . 
And what  is it  about that June board meeting that  made you remember that you were there ? 
I remember Casey Brown , one of the board members at the time , discussing , during the board meeting with the board , that she felt 0 they were , I 'm paraphrasing , treading , you know , on -- they were treading closely to  violating the Pennsylvania State Board of Education regulations on religion in the classroom . 
And do you remember anything that  was said  by any board members at that meeting that you attended  in June of 2004 ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
What do you remember  ? 
I remember Bill Buckingham making the statement , years ago somebody died on the Cross , ca n't someone take a stand for Him . 
Now , what was your reaction to what you saw and heard  at the board meeting on or about -- I think 0 you said June the 15th or 16th  ? 
I think , 0 for the record , it  's established  that it 's June the 14th . 
But  tell us , what was your reaction to what you heard   ? 
I was shocked . 
I was just utterly shocked . 
And did you do anything in response to that ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
I had wrote a letter to the editor . 
And was that before or after you attended that board meeting ? 
I wrote a letter to the editor -- I believe 0 it was actually written  before I attended the board meeting , but it was n't published  until after that June 14th board meeting . 
And where  did you send that letter to the editor  , which newspaper ? 
I submitted it to the three local newspapers , York Daily Record , York Sunday News , and York Dispatch . 
And did you do anything , before you sent it to those papers , with the content of the letter ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
I had e-mailed a letter basically stating the same thing in my letter to the board president at the time , Alan Bonsell , a copy to Dr. Nilsen , and I mailed a copy to Mr. Buckingham . 
Now , please  turn to what  's been marked   and is in the notebook before you  as  . 
Okay . 
Do you have it in front of you ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And can you tell us what it is  ? 
It looks to me  to be a copy of a letter to the editor that I wrote  . 
And I 'm going  to ask you  to read this letter into the record . 
Okay . 
Objection , Your Honor . 
This letter is hearsay . 
 Say it again . 
I 'm sorry . 
Objection , hearsay . 
Why is it hearsay  ? 
She 's going  to be reading in the letter , the contents of the statement . 
It 's an out-of-court statement . 
They 're obviously offering it for the truth of the matter . 
Who  wrote the letter ? 
She wrote the letter . 
 Overruled  . 
  
Please . 
" As a parent in the Dover Area School District , I must convey my shock and utter dismay at William Buckingham 's comments regarding the search for new biology texts for the high school . 
I am especially upset with Mr. Buckingham 's comments as  quoted  in Wednesday 's York Daily Record : ' This country was n't founded  on Muslim beliefs or evolution . 
This country was founded  on Christianity , and our students should be taught  as such . ' 
This statement is in direct contradiction to the mission statement of the Dover schools . 
" In partnership with family and community  to educate students , we emphasize sound , basic skills and nurture the diverse needs of our students as they strive  to become lifelong learners and contributing members of our global society . 
What a slap in the face to many of the parents and taxpayers of the Dover area . 
How sad that a member of our own school board would be so closed-minded and not want  to carry on the mission of Dover schools . 
" His ignorance will not only hold back children attending Dover area schools , but also reinforce other communities ' views that Dover is a backwards , close-minded community . 
If it was simply a matter of  selecting a text that  gives two contradicting scientific theories equal time , that would be an entirely different matter , but it 's not *?* . 
Creationism is religion , plain and simple . 
" Mr. Buckingham 's comments offend me , not because they are religious in nature , but because it  is my duty  to teach my children about religion as I see  fit , not the Dover Area School District during a biology class . " 
Now , that letter was actually published  in the paper ? 
Yes , it was *?* . 
And did you see it in the paper ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And did you read any response to your letter in the paper ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And can you tell us who  submitted -- whose response did you read  in the paper ? 
It was a published response noting Heather Geesey as the author . 
And who is Heather Geesey  ? 
She is a member of the Dover Area School Board . 
And her response letter was published  in what newspaper ? 
I believe 0 it was either the York Dispatch or the York Daily Record . 
And please  turn to what  's been marked  in the notebook before you as  . 
Okay . 
Does that help you remember ,  looking at it , what newspaper it was published  in  ? 
It was published  in the York Daily Record . 
And what is that that  's marked  as   ? 
It is a letter from Heather Geesey to the editor in response to my letter . 
And did you see it at the time ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
 Please read that into the record . 
Objection , Your Honor . 
Our standing objection , as well as she has not established a foundation that actually Heather Geesey wrote this article . 
She has no personal knowledge . 
 Let me first view the exhibit . 
Do you want  to respond to the objection ? 
Yes , Your Honor . 
We submitted an exhibit list to the other side , and we were told  0 there were no authentication issues with respect to any of this , so there 's no question about the authenticity of this , nor do I understand -- and further , it 's not offered  for the truth of the matter asserted * , so there 's no hearsay objection . 
Well , on the authentication ,  let 's take it in two parts . 
My understanding was that there was not an authentication issue . 
That does refresh my recollection on that point . 
Now , if there 's not an authentication issue , we 'll move on to the second -- 
Actually , Mr. Muise may be at a disadvantage here . 
I did agree with Steve that we : - he has an affidavit from someone who  has indicated 0 they have collected newspaper articles . 
So with respect to that issue , there 's no objection . 
I have agreed that she has authenticated what she did   to produce this article . 
All right . 
Very well . 
So there 's no question  then that this represents a letter written * by Ms. Geesey to the York Daily Record . 
Is that correct from the defense standpoint ? 
That is correct , Your Honor . 
That 's the representation that  has been made  in an affidavit , and I accept it . 
Now , counsel for the plaintiff is indicating the letter as  being produced  on the issue of -- or  to show notice  , obviously , on the effect prong . 
Do you want  speak to that ? 
Your Honor , I would also note that it 's an admission of a party opponent . 
And I think 0 it would come in under that basis , but that would be the hearsay justification or the justification that  would get around a hearsay objection . 
But the purpose of the letter is under the second prong . 
Is that correct ? 
It is for that purpose , and it 's also  to show that Ms. Geesey talked about the statements that  were made  in this letter at this time . 
That 's one of the issues in the case . 
So it could go to truth inasmuch as it 's an admission . 
Is that correct ? 
Exactly . 
All right . 
Your Honor , as you know *?* , we 've got the question of whether or not these are admissible for effect . 
Our position on that we 've articulated  . 
I do n't know if you want us to argue at greater length or brief , but it 's hearsay to the extent 0 it 's offered  for the truth of the matter asserted * as effect  . 
Well , I think that you reserved that argument . 
We 've had that discussion . 
I 'm inclined -- because it 's a bench trial , I 'll admit it conditionally . 
Whether I 'll consider it in my ultimate determination will be a function of the argument that I 'm allowing you to reserve and make  . 
But for the purpose of this witness , conditionally and  subject to additional argument from counsel , we 'll admit the letter and you may proceed . 
 Thank you , Your Honor . 
  
Please  read the letter . 
" This letter is in regard to the comments made * by Beth Eveland from York Township in the June York Sunday News . 
I assure you that the Dover Area School Board is not going against its mission statement . 
In fact , if you read the statement , it says  to educate our students so that they can be contributing members of society . 
" I do not believe in  teaching revisionist history . 
Our country was founded  on Christian beliefs and principles . 
We are not looking for a book that  is teaching students that this is a wrong thing or a right thing . 
It is just a fact . 
All 0 we are trying  to accomplish  with this task is  to choose a biology book that  teaches the most prevalent theories . 
" The definition of ' theory ' is merely a speculative  or an ideal  circumstance . 
 To present only one theory or to give one option would be directly contradicting our mission statement . 
You can teach creationism without it being Christianity . 
It can be presented  as a higher power . 
That is where another part of Dover 's mission statement comes into play  . 
That part would be in partnership with family and community . 
You as a parent can teach your child your family 's ideology . " 
And what was your reaction to that letter  when you read it in the paper , Mrs. Eveland  ? 
That really concerned me . 
Why ? 
That made me question , first of all , was she writing on behalf of just herself or on behalf of the whole school board since it was signed  Dover Area School Board Director , and I sensed a religious intonation . 
Now , I 'd like you  to tell us , did you attend board meetings in after June ? 
Yes , I did *?* . 
And which board meetings did you attend  ? 
All of them . 
And do you believe that -- were you at the meeting on October the 18th of 2004 ? 
Yes , I was *?* . 
And did you hear the board discuss any reason for  adopting the proposed curriculum change ? 
No , I did n't *?* . 
Do you feel that you 've been harmed  by the board 's actions ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And please  tell us how you believe that you have been harmed  by the board 's actions  . 
I feel 0 it  's my duty , as a parent ,  to introduce any kind of faith - based concept to my children , not the Dover Area School District . 
While my children are small , you know , this policy is district - wide , and there 's nothing 0  to prevent it from  being trickled down into the elementary level . 
It  's just something that I feel  strongly that my husband and I , that  's our task  to bring faith to our children . 
 Thank you . 
No further questions . 
All right . 
 Cross-examine , Mr. Muise . 
   : 
Good afternoon , ma'am . 
Good afternoon . 
You said 0 your oldest child is seven years old ? 
Yes , she is *?* . 
And what grade is she in  ? 
She 's a second-grader . 
So she 's seven years out from  attending the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School ? 
That 's correct . 
Now , you have an interest in science . 
Is that correct ? 
Somewhat , yeah . 
I believe 0 in your deposition you indicated 0 in your day-to-day events you try  to spark your children 's interest in science ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And you believe 0 it  's important  to make science interesting for your children ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
You do n't have any specific training in evolutionary theory . 
Correct ? 
No , I do n't *?* . 
I want  to get a sense for what your understanding  is  of what  is going on in the ninth-grade biology class that your daughter will be attending  several years from now . 
Is it  your understanding that Darwin 's theory of evolution is going  to be taught   pursuant to the state academic standards ? 
It is my understanding , yes . 
And that students will be tested  on subjects that  are based  on those standards , including the theory of evolution ? 
Yes , that is my understanding . 
And it  's your understanding that the students will not be tested  on the theory of intelligent design ? 
That is also my understanding , yes . 
Is it  also your understanding that it is a standards - based district , so classroom instruction will focus on  achieving those standard - based assessments in which they will eventually be tested  on  ? 
Yes . 
And intelligent design is not part of those standard - based assessments ? 
As far as my understanding , yes , it is currently not *?* . 
And these board meetings that you attended  in June , the controversy was surrounding the purchase of a biology text for the class . 
Correct ? 
Yes . 
Do you know which book it was  that the controversy was about  ? 
I believe 0 at the time it was the Miller and Levine biology text . 
And is n't it  true 0 it was Mr. Buckingham 's objections to that biology text which  precipitated some of these statements that you were referring to  in your direct testimony ? 
That 's correct . 
And what action  did the board actually take  with regard to the biology book ? 
Well , with regard to the biology book ? 
With regard to the biology book for the ninth-grade class . 
It  's my understanding that they held off on the vote in June because there was a new edition that  was going  to come out . 
And they wanted  to get the most current book instead of  wasting money on an older book . 
And so they ended up  purchasing the version ? 
Yes , they did *?* . 
Yes , they did *?* . 
Have you seen that book ? 
I have briefly looked at it . 
Now , my understanding is 0 you went to these board meetings in June because of the controversy over the biology book ? 
Yeah , part of it . 
You said 0 you just skimmed this biology book that  was at the center of the controversy ? 
It was available on the table where the board was sitting  , and I went up front and took a look at it for maybe a minute or two . 
In those two minutes that you spent   actually looking at the book that  was the center of this controversy , was there anything in that two-minute review that you saw  that you objected to  ? 
No . 
I just basically looked through the table of contents quickly . 
Is it  your understanding that that book that  was eventually purchased  by the Dover Area School District covers the theory of evolution consistent with its status in the scientific community ? 
That 's my understanding , yes . 
Now , these meetings that you attended  , would you describe them as  being fairly contentious ? 
Fairly contentious , yes . 
Shouting matches , I believe 0 the term 0 you used  in your -- 
I think 0 a circus-like atmosphere would be quite appropriate . 
Now , is it  your recollection that the first time 0 the Pandas book was mentioned   was during the July meeting that you attended  ? 
I remember it being mentioned  . 
I can not give you a specific date . 
The dates run together after a while . 
How about  mentioning the theory of intelligent design , do you recall when you may have heard that theory first mentioned   ? 
To the best of my recollection , it was first mentioned  June , July sometime . 
At the time it seemed that creationism and intelligent design were kind of used  hand-in-hand interchangeably . 
During these public comments that  precipitated some of those statements that you were referring to  , was it  your impression that Mr. Buckingham and Mr. Noel Weinrich were taking the comments as  being personally directed  toward them ? 
Not only them , but the vast majority of board members , yes , they were *?* . 
So they saw them as  being personal attacks against them ? 
Yeah . 
Now , the first meeting 0 you attended  in July , you spoke with Joe Maldonado . 
Correct ? 
Yes . 
And I believe the first -- as I testified *?* earlier , the first meeting 0 I actually had attended  was the second meeting in June . 
I guess 0 my question is , the first meeting that you attended  in July -- 
Yes , I had spoken to Joe Maldonado . 
And who is Joe Maldonado  ? 
It  's my understanding 0 he is a reporter with the York Dispatch . 
And during this conversation , he approached you and asked if you had read  or were familiar with  some comments that he had quoted  in the paper , and those were Mr. Buckingham 's comments . 
Correct ? 
Yes , he had *?* . 
And he asked you what your thoughts  were  about those comments ? 
Yes , he did *?* . 
And he also asked you if you would ask for Mr. Buckingham 's resignation on the spot . 
Correct ? 
That 's correct . 
And you told him that you did n't think 0 that was going  to happen ? 
I told him that I would just sit back and wait and see what  happened . 
And your sense for why he asked you this  was that you thought 0 he was trying  to elicit something sensational for his paper ? 
There is that possibility of  trying  to elicit something sensational , but I think 0 he was also trying  to prepare for what  might happen later on in the meeting since they tended  to denigrate in shouting matches . 
May I approach this witness , Your Honor ? 
 : 
You may *?* . 
  
Ma'am , I 'm handing you what  is your deposition testimony that you gave  on March 28th of 2005 . 
And I 'd like you  to read , if you look on Page 64 ,  read from Line 18 through 25 , and then we 'll continue on the next page once you finish that . 
" The first board meeting 0 I attended  in July he approached me before the meeting started and asked if I had read the -- if I was familiar with the comments that  were quoted  in the paper . 
I told him just simply what I had read  . 
" He asked me what I thought  about it , and I said , The comments , I do n't feel 0 that is appropriate . 
He asked me if I asked for Mr. Buckingham 's resignation on the spot . 
I told him 0 I did n't think that that was going  to happen . " 
And the next line , Line 3 , is a question which  states , " When Mr. Maldonado asked you that question  , do you have a sense for why ? " 
Could you plead read your answer , which  is Lines 5 through 8 . 
" Yeah . 
Based on what  was quoted  in the paper , yeah , I think 0 he was trying  to elicit some sensational whatever for the paper . 
It was my first board meeting . 
I just wanted  to sit back and see what  would happen . " 
Were you testifying truthfully during that deposition ? 
Yes , I was *?* , to the best of my knowledge . 
You 've had additional discussions with Mr. Maldonado about the happenings with the board . 
Correct ? 
Yeah . 
And you also had conversations with Ms. Heidi Bubb ? 
Yes . 
And she 's a reporter ? 
Yes . 
For which paper ? 
She 's a reporter for the Dispatch . 
I said earlier 0 Mr. Maldonado was for the Dispatch . 
I believe 0 he is actually a reporter for the Daily Record . 
I believe 0 you testified in your deposition that after the complaint was filed  , you actually spoke with Ms. Heidi Bubb quite a bit ? 
Yes , at the board meetings . 
Well , I do n't recall whether or not I did say after suit was filed  , but I 'll take your word for it if it 's in my deposition testimony . 
I 'm sorry , ma'am , could you -- 
I said , I do n't recall whether or not I did say that I had spoken with her after suit was filed  . 
I mean , if that 's what it says  in my deposition testimony , that 's what I testified to  at the time . 
 Let 's go to Page 68 of your deposition transcript , ma'am . 
Okay . 
On Line 16 , the question  was asked  , " Can you recall generally when you spoke with her  ? " 
And in reference of the -- if you look above , it 's referring to Ms. Heidi Bubb . 
Can you read what your answer was  on Lines 17 through 21 ? 
" She would generally approach me after the meetings . 
Especially after the complaint was filed  , I spoke with her a lot . 
She would ask me occasionally my thoughts , public comment , what I thought -- why I thought 0 the board was doing what they were doing   , those such things . " 
Now , back in July or August , 2004 , you had communications with the National Center for Science Education ? 
Yes . 
I believe 0 you joined the Listserv ? 
Yes . 
And you also had a discussion with them regarding an interview with the ? 
It was a brief e-mail exchange , but yes . 
Did you do that interview ? 
No , I did not *?* . 
Ma'am , do you understand that the statement that  's going  to be read  to the students in the ninth-grade biology class was modified  in June of 2005 ? 
Yes , I do *?* . 
And do you understand that that modification indicated that the book Of Pandas and People would be in the library along with other resources regarding intelligent design ? 
Yes . 
And is it  your understanding that those other resources included books that  are actually critical of intelligent design ? 
Yes . 
Do you have any objection to that ? 
No , I do n't *?* . 
Now , you testified about the harm that you 've received  based on these statements and the comments and the actions of the board . 
I 'd like you  to go to your deposition transcript , if you could *?* , to Page 101 . 
Okay . 
If you 'd read from Line 16 , which  presents the question , until Line 2 of the next page . 
" Question : Is there anything else that the board has done  here in connection with the curriculum change that  provides a basis for your complaint ? 
" Answer : From what I can see  from  attending the board meetings , I do n't know , because so much of the curriculum debate takes place at non-public meetings that I am not aware of  . 
And when board members are questioned  at meetings  , they really do n't answer any questions . 
So it gives this whole illusion of secrecy to the process , which  , you know , may be a big part of the problem . 
It may just be a big misunderstanding . "   Were you testifying truthfully when you answered that question  ? 
Yes , I was *?* . 
No further questions , Your Honor . 
Redirect ? 
No , Your Honor . 
All right . 
Then , ma'am , we thank you . 
You may step down . 
This is probably an appropriate time for us to end today . 
We will do so by  admitting the exhibits that we need  to *?*  , if we need  to *?* . 
 is the York Daily Record article . 
I assume 0 we 're going  to withhold  admitting that pending further proceedings . 
Is that right , Mr. Harvey ? 
Yes . 
We 'll move it in after another witness , Your Honor . 
 is the witness 's letter to the editor . 
Are you moving for the admission of  ? 
Yes , Your Honor . 
Now , you 've stated an objection to that . 
The objection is noted  . 
You do n't have  to restate it . 
And I will note the objection . 
Do you have any additional objections 0 you want  to make  to that ? 
Not at this time , Your Honor . 
That 's it . 
All right . 
It 's admitted   subject to the defendants ' objection . 
 is the letter from School Board Member Geesey to the editor again . 
I think 0 I noted that it was admitted  . 
Over the objection already of the defendants , we 'll reaffirm that , but you can make any other objections 0 you want  to *?*  on the record , but I think 0 that was thoroughly argued  at that time . 
That 's correct , Your Honor . 
All right . 
We will reconvene a little later tomorrow , at 9:30 a.m, because of some matters that I must attend to  , and the session will go longer . 
With everybody 's indulgence , I would expect  to go to approximately 5 o'clock , no later than 5 o'clock tomorrow  to make up for the time that we lose  during the morning session . 
So we will stand in recess until 9:30 a.m. on Thursday . 
We thank you all . 
 Whereupon , the proceedings were adjourned  at 4:20 p.m.   
 I hereby certify that the proceedings and evidence are contained  fully and accurately in the notes taken * by me on the within proceedings and that this copy is a correct transcript of the same . 
 Dated  in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , this 28th day of September , 2005 . 

 
 ,        . 
I        . 
            . 
I        . 
               . 
 I   . 
     ? 
          . 
     
 : 713 991-5621 . 
 
 
 
<header> 
<header_removed> 
</header> 
<body> 
that 's {thats} fine : - we ca n't pay them anyway 
----- Original Message ----- 
From : Parker , Megan Sent * : Wednesday , November 28 , 2001 11:38  To : Ward , Kim Houston Subject :  : City of Pasadena 
I 'll check with Patti later today . 
On payment  
We are now having  to forecast five days out . 
If I do n't know today , I can not pay Pasadena until next Thursday . 
Megan 
----- Original Message ----- 
Sent * : Wednesday , November 28 , 2001 9:03  
To : Parker , Megan 
Subject :  : City of Pasadena 
Patti is the one with the details , I 'm just the deal maker and do n't have access to any of the systems . 
All 0 I know  is what fixed priced baseload deals we have  . 
I have no idea what  flows . 
I hope 0 Patti can help you soon . 
 Let me know if you do n't hear from her today . 
Thanks , Kim 
----- Original Message ----- 
From : Parker , Megan Sent * : Wednesday , November 28 , 2001 8:56  To : Ward , Kim Houston Subject :  : City of Pasadena 
If I can get all of the information today , I can tell you this afternoon . 
It  does n't take long  to create the calc sheets . 
I understand from Janine that you or Patti can provide me with the detail that I need  . 
If necessary , I can come  pick it up . 
I have sent Patti a list . 
For payment , we have  to forecast the money two days out . 
So , if I know today , I can pay on Friday . 
Megan 
----- Original Message ----- 
Sent * : Wednesday , November 28 , 2001 8:42  
To : Parker , Megan 
Subject :  : City of Pasadena 
 Thanks you so much for  working on these as fast as you have *?* : - there was a priority in  getting them out . 
However , as you know , the less cash outlay that we have  right now the better . 
 Let 's {Lets} wait and try  to offset the amount 0 we owe them  with what they owe us  : - so I say  wait until you get July and August done  . 
What do you think 0 the time frame  is  on this ? 
And when would be  the earliest that we would make the payment  ? 
Thanks , Kim 
----- Original Message ----- 
From : Parker , Megan Sent * : Wednesday , November 28 , 2001 8:38  To : Ward , Kim Houston Subject : City of Pasadena 
Kim : I have completed the invoices for April , May and June and we owe Pasadena each month for a total of $ 3,615,910.62  . 
I am waiting  to hear back from Patti on May and June  to make   sure 0 they are okay with her . 
Do you want me to pay Pasadena on Friday for these months or do you want me to hold off until I finish July and August ? 
Again , I do not have all of the information for July and August , so I can not give you any numbers . 
If I go by what  is currently in the system as a guide , Pasadena would owe Enron a little over $ 1 mil  . 
I need  to forecast the money today , so please  let me know what you would like  to do  . 
 : - I will be out of the office all next week. 
Megan 
</body> 
 
Brief History 
Prehistoric man in Asia Minor  now modern Turkey  or Greece could look out across the Aegean toward the horizon and see the faint silhouette of land . 
Their curiosity pushed them  to build vessels that  were strong enough  to ford the open seas and reach these islands ,  marking the start of the long legacy of Mediterranean seafaring . 
Around 7000 b. c, the Phoenicians set out from what  is now Iran  to explore their surroundings . 
They eventually reached the islands , and founded colonies on the islands in the northernmost part of the Aegean Sea . 
An important early material , obsidian , was discovered  on the island of Milos . 
Obsidian is a hard , vitreous volcanic rock , which  could be fashioned  into tools for cutting and stabbing . 
The high quality of the seam on Milos ensured that the area remained popular with early travelers . 
The basic elements of life in the Aegean began  to come together as early as 5000 b. c, and were already in place by the late Bronze Age c. 2700 b. c. 
The major changes were not to daily tasks and routines , but to the political power base , which  changed regularly and not necessarily peacefully throughout the ages . 
Cycladic Culture 
At around 3500 b. c, a sophisticated culture evolved in the Cyclades islands . 
The distinctive , sculpted marble figures of the era are now being reproduced  in vast quantities as souvenirs . 
You will find original examples in the archaeological museums throughout the Cyclades , although one of the earliest examples is in the museum on Paros . 
The people farmed and fished . ; 
on the dawning of the Bronze Age in 2700 b. c, they began  to work with metals . 
The Cycladic culture was influenced  by societies in the east ,  importing the pottery wheel from Mesopotamia . 
They also continued  to trade in obsidian and the local marble . 
The Minoans and the Myceneans 
Farther south in Crete , the Minoan culture developed after 2000 b. c. into the most significant of its age ,  spreading its influence throughout the region by trade and diplomacy . 
Santorini Thira , the next major island north , was heavily influenced  by Crete , and the settlements of Thira and Akrotiri thrived at this time . 
The magnificent frescoes and mosaics found * at Akrotiri are in Athens at present , but the remains of the buildings at the site provide ample evidence of the sophistication of the culture here . 
Around 1500 b. c, a massive volcanic eruption at Santorini destroyed not only Akrotiri : — under feet of ash and pumice : — but the whole Minoan civilization . 
Massive tidal waves swept over Crete , and other parts of the Mediterranean ,  smashing buildings and drowning many thousands of people . 
In the wake of this tremendous natural upheaval , the Aegean Islands next came under the influence of the Mycenaeans  at around 1300 b. c.  , who  had a base in the Peloponnese region of the Greek mainland . 
The Mycenaeans were an acquisitive race who  came  to conquer , not to trade . 
Their extensive military campaigns were later chronicled  by Homer in his epic poems The Odyssey and The Iliad . 
The Rise of Athens 
The Dorians , who  came overland from northern Europe , conquered the Mycenaeans . 
They were a barbaric race , and their custody of the area brought about a dark period during which the written word was forgotten  and art disappeared  . 
They held sway over islands off the northern Greek coast , but the Phoenicians kept control of the main sea routes . ; 
south of the area , trade continued as usual . 
At the same time , city-states began  to grow in influence on the southern Greek mainland . 
Athens became the most powerful ,  heralding the start of the classical Greek period . 
However , Greece was not yet a country ; each city-state was self - governing and autonomous . 
The new culture spread throughout the Mediterranean ,  helped  by a huge increase in migration from the mainland to new settlements such as Carthage , a Greek city on the African coast of the Mediterranean . 
Culture and the arts flourished once again . 
Athletic prowess was admired  and the Olympic games were constituted  in 776 b. c,  to promote friendly competition . 
Homer wrote his epic works on Chios ; and lyrical poetry  was much admired  , particularly the work of the poets Archilochos on Paros and Sappho on Lesvos . 
The preeminent islands of this era were Delos , a sacred island and center of religion ruled * by Athens ; Samos , ruled * by the tyrant Polycrates ; and Naxos , whose ruler Lygdamis  undertook some major building projects . 
Archaeology shows that , during this time , societies lived mainly in coastal trading towns with little settlement inland . 
The Persian Wars 
As Athens rose in influence and power in the West , it was matched  in the East by the rise of the Persian Empire . 
From a power base in Anatolia , the Persians overran the eastern Aegean Islands and set their sights on the Cyclades . 
In 490 b. c, they captured sacred Delos and razed the settlements on Naxos . 
The island communities were undecided about which side  to back  for a time . 
Paros and Andros contributed to the Persian armory , while others supported Athens . 
The two superpowers finally clashed at the epic battles of Marathon and Salamis in 480 b. c . 
The Persians were defeated  , and Athens duly punished the islands that  had turned against it . 
Following its victory , Athens introduced the concept of a mutual protection alliance  a kind of  of the ancient world  . 
Several islands and Greek city-states agreed  to work together , and created a treasury 0  to fund their plans , which  was held  on the island of Delos . 
The alliance became known  as the Delian League . 
Although there were minor internal wrangles , the league controlled the Aegean and the greater Athenian Empire for most of the fifth century b. c . 
Later , in 454 b. c, the treasury was transferred  to Athens and its deposits were used   to finance the construction of many of the major buildings and temples of the Classical Age . 
In 431 b. c, Athens began a war with its neighbor and league member Sparta . 
Although the islands saw little action , as the war went on they could see that Athens was slowly losing its power . 
Before the end of the war in 401 b. c, many islands had already transferred their allegiance to the victors , who  were led  by Philip of Macedon . 
He was followed  in 336 b. c. by his son Alexander the Great , one of the most remarkable leaders in history . 
His rise to power ushered in the Hellenistic period . 
Hellenistic and Roman Periods 
When Alexander went on  to conquer lands as far to the east as India  , the Aegean became a crossroads for the long trading routes . 
Delos became one of the largest marketplaces in the empire . 
Following Alexander ’s death , his lands were divided  among his generals . 
Much of the Aegean  came under the rule of the Ptolemies , along with Egypt . 
Cleopatra was a member of this famous ruling clan . 
Although in 88 b. c, Mithradates made a swift and successful raid from the East across Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands , the next major power change brought influence from the West . 
The Greek Hellenistic Empire was gradually , and peacefully , absorbed  into the Roman Empire . 
The Byzantine Empire and the Coming of Christianity 
The Romans ruled a pagan empire , but the Aegean had an important influence on the early development of Christianity . 
In a. d. 95 , St. John arrived on Patmos , a small rocky island in the Dodecanese , as a political prisoner . 
It was here that he wrote what  was  to become the final book of the New Testament , the Book of Revelation  . 
It was n’t until a. d. 330 , however , when the newly converted Emperor Constantine made Byzantium , renamed *  Constantinople , capital of his Eastern Empire  that Christianity was assured  of its dominant role in future Greek life  . 
The Byzantine Empire had powerful and well - fortified cities , but the countryside and the outlying islands were ravaged  by waves of invaders . 
In an attempt  to counter a threat from the Saracen Muslims , a new potent religious force from the East , the Byzantine army forcefully enlisted the men of the islands . 
Disease took a further toll . 
By the time of the Crusades , many of the Aegean islands had been practically depopulated  . 
As the Byzantine Empire weakened at the end of the first millennium , Crusader forces were sent  from Western Europe  to counter the Muslim forces and retake Jerusalem for the Christian faith . 
Unfortunately , their zeal was not matched  by their discrimination . 
The crusaders swept through the land of Byzantium  slaughtering Christians as well as Muslims , civilians as well as soldiers . 
Constantinople was taken  by Crusader forces in 1204 , and they stripped the city of many of its finest treasures : — which  now grace the public buildings of Venice : — although a large consignment of books and manuscripts was transferred  to the monastery at Patmos before the city fell . 
While Byzantine land was being divided  , there was no one in control of the seas , so pirates raided towns on many of the islands . 
 To counter this , the populations moved from their homes on the coast and built settlements inland , out of sight of the raiding parties . 
This created a pattern seen * today throughout the Aegean of a small port  skala  which  serves an inland settlement or chora ,  making it  easier  to protect the island from attack . 
The minor Aegean Islands were taken  by various powerful European noblemen , many of whom  were Genoese or Venetian , such as Marco Sanudo on Naxos . 
The noblemen had free rein  to create their own fiefdoms . 
The Venetians fortified their main towns : — Naxos Town and Antiparos Town are wonderful examples of this : —  creating labyrinths of narrow alleys and cul-de-sacs that  were designed   to confuse  and to demoralize  invaders . 
The Genoese took control of the eastern Aegean Islands , which  were considered  the most valuable for agriculture and trade . 
After a final bloody defeat by the Muslims in 1309 , Christian forces were forced  from the Holy Land . 
The Knights of St. John , a holy military force , made their way to Rhodes and Kos in the Dodecanese . 
They began the process of  building their strong citadels , and reinforcing the Christian faith on the islands . 
However , they had not seen the last of their Muslim foe . 
force  was gaining strength in the east 0  to threaten their new bases . 
The Coming of the Ottoman Turks 
The Ottomans were roving invaders who  came from the east ,  taking land in what  is now Turkey . 
By the end of the 13th century , they began their first raids on the Aegean Islands . 
In 1453 , they took Constantinople , and immediately made it their capital ,  renaming it  Istanbul . 
They then set their sights on the islands of the Knights of St. John and , after an unsuccessful siege in 1480 , they finally ejected the knights from the Dodecanese in 1522 . 
In 1566 , they wrested Chios from the Genoese ,  bolstering their hold on the eastern Aegean Islands , but the Cyclades remained in Venetian hands for another generation or more : — Tinos was the last 0  to fall in 1715 . 
The Ottomans brought new influences to the islands that they controlled  ,  forming a large empire that  stretched around the eastern Mediterranean . 
Toward Greek Independence 
However , a movement  was growing on the Greek peninsula against Ottoman rule and for an independent Greek state . 
In 1770 , Russia came  to aid the Greeks  defined * by their Orthodox religion rather than by historical geographical boundaries  ,  declaring war on the Ottoman Empire and occupying several Aegean islands until 1774 . 
Graffiti written * by Russian soldiers can be seen  in the caves of Antiparos . 
Although this attempt was unsuccessful , the campaign for a Greek state continued into the 19th century and began  to grow in strength . 
The Aegean Islands played their part . 
Lesvos , Chios , and Samos lay in the important shipping lanes , and patriots began  disrupting Ottoman cargo traffic . 
In return , the Turks violently put down every insurrection , including the massacre on Chios , when 22,000 people were slaughtered   . 
The Ottoman Empire was weakening , however , and in 1821 , the peoples of the Greek mainland achieved nationhood for the first time . 
The Cyclades and the Sporades island chains were also included  in this new state . 
new sense of identity enveloped Greek peoples throughout the Aegean ,  thus commencing a movement 0  to expand Greece and unify the disparate Orthodox populations . 
The Twentieth Century 
series of disastrous decisions at the beginning of the 20th century began  to sound a death knell for the Ottoman Empire . 
The Turks lost a short war with Italy , and were forced   to relinquish the Dodecanese islands to the Italians . 
Greece took this opportunity  to absorb the islands of the northern and eastern Aegean and to add Macedonia to its mainland territories . 
Following this debacle , the Ottomans then allied themselves to Germany in the World War I ,  losing more territory with the defeat of the Germans in that war . 
Greece was handed  a strip of land along the western coast of Asia Minor , which  for over ,00 years had had a substantial Greek population . 
Greece moved in  to administer the land , but a new influence upset any grand dreams of  making this region a part of greater Greece . 
In 1923 , Turkey broke away from the tired Ottoman rulers , and Kemal Ataturk rose to power on a wave of popular support . 
He promised a modern state for his people , but as the situation became volatile , civil strife broke out in Turkish cities , and those considered *  Greek were victims of threats and violence . 
Many had  to leave their birthplaces ,  fleeing to Lesvos , Chios , and Samos , the Greek - ruled islands just offshore . 
Thousands of people arrived with little more than the clothes 0 they wore  ,  putting great strain on the resources of the islands . 
Finally , Greece was ousted  from its new territory in Asia Minor , which  became part of the new Turkish state . 
Greece attempted  to stay out of World War , but Mussolini saw Greece as an ideal addition to his Italian empire . 
His forces made a series of attacks from their bases in the Dodecanese islands , including  sinking a Greek naval vessel in the harbor of Tinos Town , but they only succeeded in  strengthening the resolve of the population against them . 
Later the Germans came in force and occupied many of the islands . 
After the war , in 1949 , the Dodecanese islands finally became part of the Greek nation . 
But the country was politically fragmented , with arguments between monarchists and republicans , right and left , and tension escalated into civil war . 
The struggle bypassed most of the islands , although there was fierce fighting on Samos . 
Even after the fighting stopped more than a decade later , the country was not stable . 
At the same time , the massive growth in air and road transport saw shipping decline in importance . 
The Aegean Islands , which  for centuries had been important ports on the trading routes , became the backwaters of this new transport network and the economies of several islands came close to collapse . 
In 1967 , the military took the reins of power in Athens , and until 1974 , the “ Colonels ” held sway with a repressive and brutal regime . 
Many Greek islanders chose  to leave rather than live in poverty and terror , and many made new homes in the United States and Australia . 
The expansion of air travel began the age of mass tourism , and Greece along with the Aegean Islands became exciting destinations for northern Europeans escaping their damp , cool summers . 
In 1982 , Greece joined the European Common Market  now the European Union  . 
Since this time , membership has been of great monetary benefit to the country . 
The has given large subsidies 0  to develop Greece ’s infrastructure and grants 0  to excavate and protect its ancient monuments . 
Airfields have been constructed  on a number of the islands , and road systems have been expanded and improved  . 
Private investment has even made an increasingly modern ferry fleet possible . 
Politically , the 1990s have been relatively quiet times for the islands , although the divorce of Greek prime minister Andreas Papandreou and his subsequent marriage to a much younger woman caused consternation within conservative Greek society . 
As the Balkans flared to war once again , Greek nationalism has stirred , and there have been discussions in the kafeneion about the land of Macedonia returning to the fold of its forefathers . 
 
Brief History 
Jerusalem 's recorded history begins with its mention in Egyptian court records 4,000 years ago , but there had been human settlements here for centuries , probably millennia , before that . 
At the beginning of the second millennium b. c, Jerusalem was a Canaanite mountain stronghold on a secondary trade route , far less important than biblical cities such as Hazor , Megiddo , Beth Shean , and Shechem . 
The earliest name associated * with the city , Ur usalim , perhaps meant " city of Shalim " or " founded * by Shalim . " 
Scholars speculate that Shalim might have been an ancient Semitic deity of peace , for the name resembles the modern Hebrew and Arabic words for " peace " : shalom and salaam , respectively . 
If  true , this is an ironic name for a city that  would become one of the most constantly and bitterly embattled places on the face of the earth . 
Biblical Jerusalem 
In the Bible , Genesis 14 : 18 - 20 records that Abraham visited the city of " Salem " in approximately 1800 b. c. and was blessed  by the city 's ruler , Melchzedik , who  offered him bread and wine . 
The city is not mentioned  again in the Bible until the time of the great poet warrior , King David , who  captured the city from the Jebusites in about 1000 b. c . 
The Bible describes how David 's soldiers conquered Jerusalem by  discovering a water tunnel under the walls and using it  to take the city by surprise  . 
Warren 's Shaft , part of a Canaanite water system discovered * by 19th - century archaeologists and open to visitors , might be the very tunnel infiltrated * by David 's army . 
Perhaps because Jerusalem was in neutral territory not allotted * to any of the twelve rival tribes of Israel , David made it the capital of his newly formed kingdom and brought the most talented artisans , dedicated priests , magical poets and musicians , and the most formidable soldiers from each of the tribes  to live in his city . 
He also brought the Ark of the Covenant , the portable tabernacle containing the Tablets of the Law received * on Mount Sinai , to the Spring of Gihon , just outside the walls of Jerusalem . 
There the Ark rested until it was placed  in the Temple , built * in approximately 960 b. c. on Mt. Moriah , the high point at the northern end of the city . 
The Temple  today known * as the " First " Temple  was completed  by David 's son and successor , King Solomon . 
According to biblical tradition , although David bought the land for the Temple and carefully assembled its building materials , he was deemed  unworthy of  constructing the Temple because he was a man of war with blood on his hands . 
At the Temple 's dedication , Solomon addressed his God : "  the Heavens , even the Heaven of the Heavens , can not contain Thee : ; how much less this House that I have built   ? " 
The site of the Temple eventually became identified  as Mt. Moriah , on which it stood  , where Abraham was called   to sacrifice his son Isaac  . 
Along with this splendid house of worship , Solomon built a royal palace , mansions for his wives , temples for the foreign gods worshipped * by the princesses 0 he had married  , and towers for the defense of the capital . 
Under the wise reign of Solomon , the city flourished as the capital of an empire that  stretched from Damascus to the Red Sea and controlled the trade routes from Egypt to Phoenicia . 
The Temple and royal palace were adorned  with gold and ivory from Africa and with cedar from Lebanon : ; 
the beauties and glories of Jerusalem under Solomon have captivated readers of the Bible for almost 3,000 years . 
But with his death the empire collapsed , and the Israelite kingdom was divided  into two separate , impoverished , often warring nations : Israel , with its capital at Shechem in the north , ruled * by a series of northern dynasties : ; and the smaller kingdom of Judah , with its capital at Jerusalem , from which the Davidic dynasty continued  to rule  . 
The Bible tells us that the cruelty and impiety of the rulers of both kingdoms aroused the fury of the great Prophets . 
In 701 b. c. the Assyrian armies of Sennacherib destroyed Israel and moved southward  to besiege Jerusalem . 
Thanks to King Hezekiah 's hidden water tunnel , the city narrowly escaped destruction . 
The end of David 's dynasty came in 587 b. c, when Nebuchadnezzar , King of Babylon , invaded Judah  to lay siege to Jerusalem  . 
When it fell  , the Temple and all the buildings were burned  . 
The people of the once - glorious city were forced  into an exile known * as " the Babylonian Captivity . " 
In time , the kingdom of Babylon was overthrown  and the Israelites were permitted   to return to Jerusalem in 539 b. c . 
The city was now under the more tolerant rule of the Persians , but rebuilding was slow work . 
The Second Temple was finished  in 515 b. c, but much of the city still lay in ruins . 
Jerusalem submitted peaceably to the rule of the Greeks  in 332 b. c. under Alexander the Great and , subsequently , to his Hellenistic successors as well as the Egyptian Ptolomeys and the Syrian Seleucids . 
When Seleucid rulers outlawed Judaism  , Jews led * by Judah Maccabee and his brothers staged a revolution in 167 b. c. and , against all odds , restored the primacy of Jewish religious life in Jerusalem . 
The Macabbees cleansed the Temple of Hellenistic idols and the blood of pagan sacrifices ; the eight - day celebration of Hanukkah  Feast of Dedication  commemorates their victory . 
The Hasmonean dynasty , descendants of the Maccabee family , ruled an independent Jewish Commonwealth that  stretched from the Negev to the Galilee . 
Jerusalem grew ,  surrounded * with a formidable wall and defended * by towers beside the Jaffa Gate . 
The Hasmoneans ruled until Pompey 's Roman legions arrived in 63 b. c . 
Roman Jerusalem 
After the initial years of Roman administration and political infighting , Rome installed Herod  scion of a family from Idumea , a Jewish kingdom in the desert  as King of Judea . 
He reigned from 37 to 4 b. c, during which time he fortified the Hasmonean wall and rebuilt the defense towers beside Jaffa Gate , the foundation of which  still stand  . 
Several palaces were built  and a water system installed  . 
Herod also completely rebuilt the Temple ,  making it one of the most important religious centers in the Roman Empire . 
The courtyard around the Temple was expanded   to accommodate hundreds of thousands of pilgrims , and the Temple Mount was shored  up by retaining walls made * with great stone blocks . 
One of these walls , the Western Wall , is today a major reminder of Jerusalem 's greatness under Herod . 
massive fortress  was built   overlooking the Temple Mount , which  Herod named   " Antonia " in honor of his Roman friend and benefactor , Mark Antony . 
For all his accomplishments , Herod was nevertheless hated  by his subjects ; he taxed , he tortured , and he ordered the massacre of male Jewish infants in an attempt  to do away with the heralded Messiah . 
When Jesus was born  in about 4 b. c.  , Joseph and Mary escaped Herod 's paranoia by  fleeing into Egypt with the new - born infant . 
They returned  to live in the Galilee village of Nazareth ,  making pilgrimages to Jerusalem . 
According to biblical accounts , Jesus spent his life  ministering in the Galilee Valley . 
In about a. d. 30 he and his followers went for Passover to Jerusalem , which  was in unrest at this time ,  dissatisfied with Roman domination . 
Jesus 's entry into the Temple caused a commotion ; after the Passover dinner he was arrested  by the temple priests , who  were under direct Roman rule . 
Jesus was put  on trial quickly and condemned  to crucifixion , a Roman form of execution for political and religious dissidents as well as for common criminals . 
In a province rife with rebellion and retaliation , the execution in Jerusalem of yet another religious leader from the Galilee did not by itself have an immediate effect on history . 
After Jesus 's crucifixion , harsh Roman rule continued until a. d. 66 , when the Jews rebelled  . 
For four years Jewish zealots fought against the might of Rome . 
At the end , the Roman general Titus laid siege to Jerusalem in a. d. 70 ,  finally attacking its starved and weakened defenders . 
Those who  did n't escape were executed  or sold  into slavery . 
The Holy City and the Temple were destroyed  . 
The last of the zealots held out for another three years at Masada   see page 76  . 
Half a million civilians  died in the Galilee and Judea as a result of this first revolt against Rome , a number unequaled in ancient warfare . 
Christian and Islamic Jerusalem 
For 60 years Jerusalem lay in ruins , until the Roman Emperor Hadrian ordered the city rebuilt  as a Roman town dedicated * to Jupiter . 
In outrage , the Jews began a second revolt against Rome , led * by Simon bar Kochba . 
The ruins of Jerusalem were briefly liberated  , but , in the end , Jewish resistance to Rome was defeated  with great loss of life . 
The planned new Roman city , Aelia Capitolina , was built  over the ruins of Herodian Jerusalem , and Jews were barred  from  residing there for all time . 
Jerusalem 's physical existence as a spiritual city seemed  finished  , but its spiritual power for Jews , and for the struggling new Christian religion , remained . 
For the next two centuries Aelia Capitolina enjoyed an innocuous history . 
But the Roman Empire became Christian in the fourth century , and Jerusalem became a center of religion once again . 
Queen Helena , a devout Christian and the mother of Emperor Constantine the Great , made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 326  to identify the sites associated * with Jesus 's life . 
She found that the city 's most beautiful Roman temple , dedicated * to the goddess Aphrodite , stood on the site of the crucifixion . 
The temple was demolished  and a vast , Classical - style church was built  around Golgotha  the hill where Jesus 's crucifixion was believed  to have taken place   . 
Throughout Jerusalem , other spots important to Jesus 's life were commemorated  with religious structures . 
Pilgrims came from all over the Roman  and , later , Byzantine  Empire during the following centuries , but the prosperity 0 they brought  lasted only until 614 , when Persian armies overtook Judea and reduced Jerusalem to rubble again  . 
In 629 , Jerusalem was recaptured  by the Byzantines . 
 Still reeling from the effects of the Persian devastation , Jerusalem was conquered  in 638 by the forces of Islam . 
The Temple Mount was identified  in Islamic tradition as " the farthest spot "  in Arabic , el-aksa  , the site to which the Prophet Muhammad was transported  in one night from Mecca  on a winged horse , as  described  in the 17th chapter of the Koran . 
From here the Prophet ascended to the heavens and was permitted   to glimpse paradise . 
The rock on the Temple Mount from which he ascended  , at  or close to  the site of the ruined Temple , was commemorated  by the construction of the Dome of the Rock in 691 . 
The Dome of the Rock remains Jerusalem 's most striking monument ; it is counted  among the most beautiful buildings ever created * . 
By about 715 , the El-Aksa Mosque , third holiest  place of prayer in Islam  after Mecca and Medina  , had been built  on the southern side of the Temple Mount . 
Jerusalem continued under Islamic rule for the next four and a half centuries . 
In 1099 , under their leaders Godfrey de Bouillon and Tancred , the Crusaders captured the Holy City for Christendom by  slaughtering both Muslims and Jews . 
Crusaders , Mamelukes , and Turks 
The Crusaders established a feudal Christian state with Godfrey at its head . 
They built many impressive churches during the term of the first Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem , but in 1187 they were driven  out by Muslim forces under the great warrior Saladin . 
During the Sixth Crusade 1228 - 1229 , the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick managed  to secure Jerusalem for the Christians by negotiation . 
The Christians , however , could not hold the city . 
After they lost Jerusalem , a Mongol invasion swept through , and in 1244 the Mameluke dynasty of Egypt took control ,  ruling Jerusalem for the next 250 years . 
The city struggled  to rebuild from Crusader wars and invasions . 
Much of the best Islamic architecture in the city was constructed  in the Mameluke era , but the past thousand years had taken their toll : 
Jerusalem was unable  to regain the prosperity 0 it had enjoyed  in earlier times . 
In the early 16th century , the Ottoman Turkish Empire was advancing through the Middle East . 
Jerusalem fell to the Ottomans in 1517 ,  remaining under their control for 400 years . 
Suleiman the Magnificent rebuilt the walls and gates in the form 0 they retain  to this day . 
Fountains , inns , religious schools , and barracks were constructed  . 
But when Suleiman died  , his empire , including Jerusalem , began a long period of decline . 
The Holy City remained a backwater until the 19th century , when renewed interest among Christian pilgrims made it the destination of thousands of travelers each year  . 
19th - Century Aspirations 
At the same time , many Jews sought religious freedom and fulfillment by  moving to Palestine  as the Holy Land was traditionally called   and especially to Jerusalem . 
In the 1890s , Theodor Herzl 1860 - 1904 worked  to organize a movement , Zionism , 0  to create a Jewish state . 
Chaim Weizmann 1874 - 1952 , a scientist born * in Russia but later a British subject , did much  to put Herzl 's hopes into practice . 
Weizmann was an important figure in the negotiations with the British government that  led to the Balfour Declaration of 1917 , supporting the idea of a Jewish " national home " in Palestine that  also respected the rights of existing non-Jewish people already living there . 
The problem was that British strategists , who  were fighting the Ottoman Turks in 1917 , had secretly promised the lands to their World War I Arab allies . 
In 1922 the League of Nations granted the British a mandate  to administer Palestine . 
Jerusalem flourished during the early years of the Mandate . 
Modern neighborhoods , hospitals , schools , and the Hebrew University were built  in West Jerusalem , the new Jewish enclave . 
But Arab opposition to new Jewish immigration and construction in Palestine led to increasing strife ; by 1946 , Jerusalem was an armed camp . 
In 1947 the United Nations voted for the partition of Palestine into two states , one Jewish and one Arab , with Jerusalem as an international city that  belonged to neither . 
But  lacking the means 0  to enforce its decision , the United Nations was powerless  to halt the fighting that  erupted as the British withdrew their troops in 1948 . 
Modern Israel 
The State of Israel was declared  during this difficult time . 
In response , member states of the Arab League sent troops 0  to help the Palestinian Arabs . 
West Jerusalem , separated * from the rest of the new Jewish nation , held out under siege for several months until Israeli forces secured a land corridor connecting the city to the coastal areas . 
Jews were evacuated  from the Old City 's Jewish Quarter , and thousands of Arab families fled their homes in West Jerusalem . 
As a result of armistice agreements in 1949 , Jerusalem was divided  : 
West Jerusalem was  to be under Israeli control , and East Jerusalem  including the Old City , with its Jewish , Muslim , Christian , and Armenian quarters  came under Jordanian authority . 
Free access to holy sites for members of all religions was guaranteed  by the armistice agreements . 
However , with the city partitioned  by fortifications and barbed wire , no Israeli or Jewish pilgrims were allowed  to visit the Western Wall or other Jewish sites in East Jerusalem . 
For the next 19 years , Jerusalem was two cities . 
Political and religious boundaries were aggravated  by occasional incidents of terrorism or sniping until the Six Day War in June 1967 . 
Within three days the city was completely in Israeli hands , and in two weeks it was physically and administratively reunited  . 
Jerusalem 's mayor , Teddy Kollek , spent the next 25 years  orchestrating a vast program of development , adding new cultural institutions and parks and instituting neighborhood restoration projects while  tirelessly mediating the concerns of Jerusalem 's many communities . 
Today , as always , Jerusalem is a city of controversies : religious Jews in conflict with secular Jews : ; Palestinians calling for independence : ; many residents protesting a wave of high-rise development that many claim 0  will turn the Holy City into a holy megalopolis . 

Tara stood  stock - still ,  waiting for the first tiny gleam from the scout craft to appear in the darkness of the wormhole . 
The gentle constant breeze of recycled air from the vent above blew an annoying hair against her nose , but she ignored it . 
gasp from the psychic broke her silent vigil , and she turned . 
" Results , Harmon , ? " she suppressed the surge of annoyance that  ran through her as she contemplated the psi 's gift of  getting all the hot news first . 
Harmon 's face slowly animated : - joy sweeping in  to replace stern concentration . 
" Tarrin says 0 the planet 's a freaking gemstone  
 Thriving with life , large and small forms , no buildings of any kind , hydrocarbons , metals , and a stable atmosphere . 
He 's not even bringing them back through for a face to face briefing . 
He says 0 we should come through now , immediately , before the probe is reported   late . " 
" Harmon ,  tell that good for nothing son of a beta  to get his hindquarters through the gate and back here  , or I 'll open fire on him when we come back through  , . " Tara fumed  . 
Of all the impertinence  
Tarrin , no doubt with orders from Mason , was questioning her command decisions . 
That 's what I get  for  not using mercenaries . 
She returned to her watch ,  regarding her own reflection in the long window . 
Mahogany - black curly hair , cut *  short in the typical military style framed a careworn , dark - skinned face . 
It was not an attractive face right now : ; her ebony eyes shadowed  by hours on the watch , full lips pursed  with frustration . 
She had the look of every leader 0 she had ever known  . 
At six foot two , she stood  a full head taller than even her Arrallin first officer . 
Her glowering expression completed the imposing effect . 
She picked imaginary flecks off her stark gray jumpsuit , and snorted . 
You look like hell , Tar . 
 Do n't blow this . 
 Do n't let fatigue get to you . 
She used the discretion of the mirrored window  to secretively survey her crew . 
Harmon was an excellent addition to the bridge team , but was she open minded enough  to defy United Earth Command and sever all ties from Earth ? 
She watched the psi bob her head ,  unaware of the rest of the bridge ,  shaking blonde curls as she chattered away with the approaching psi relay on Mason 's ship . 
She seemed  so depthless : - self conscious and shallow on the outside , but  having that incredible gift . 
There had  to be more to her . 
Well , if she did n't pan out , she 'd be terminated  . 
Any crew member that  would jeopardize the project was meat . 
It  would be a shame * to lose that talent , though . 
Rakal , her first officer , was staring pensively at his panel . 
He was what this was all about  . 
She watched his graceful fingers ending in thick black claws tap out calculations on the panel . 
His pointed ears swiveled back and forth ,  catching every sound from the bridge , while his long tail swished to the rhythm of his thoughts . 
Only those of the Arrallin Insurrection inner team knew 0 he was no common ' beta furry ' . 
His silken fur , which  would be tawny golden and striped with jet black bands , was dyed  perfectly to a pure black , and his mane trimmed and thinned  as  to be indistinguishable from the rest of his coat . 
His eyes had been treated  and darkened  to a rich purple  to disguise the brilliant golden yellow color that  would mark him as an Alpha Arrallin , and leader of his hive . 
Right now , he looked like an overgrown wolf who  'd learned touch - typing . 
The scout ship re-emerged from the hole : - a brilliant speck emerging from a sphere of velvety blackness . 
It's hail crackled across the comm , and Tara spun  to retake her seat at the helm . 
"  Launch the second probe . 
Wo n't Central be crushed   to learn that another gateway has yielded little more than a class planet and a white dwarf system . 
Level 1 and 2 staffers should prepare  to be briefed  and move out . 
This sounds like it 's the one . " 
The distinctive whuffle of pleasure rippled through the betas on the bridge , and Rakal let loose a small growl , as if  to caution his charges against false hope . 
They 'd scouted twenty - seven gates so far , and none had turned up anything worth the Insurrection 's time . 

 
I would say 0 between the ages of 7 to 10 years old it  was a really big thing  to go to the movie on Saturday mornings . / 
And one particular movie theater 0 we went to  , they would show serials  every Saturday , which  were a continued story . / 
So if you missed one Saturday you would miss what  happened in a particular episode , and you , um , would n't know what  had taken place . / 
So we would go every Saturday morning . / 
And also at this theater , they gave prizes to different people . / 
And one of the way 0 they gave prizes  was , 0 they would take big group photos and everybody , /- 
and there were stairs going up to a balcony , real wide stairs . / 
And the big group of people would go  stand on the stairs / 
and there would be probably 30 or 40 kids in the picture . / 
And they 'd take the picture / 
and then you would go back the next Saturday after they had been developed  / 
and they would have circled 3 or 4 people in the picture / 
and the people whose head  was circled  would get the prizes . / 
 
Is that for real ? / 
 
That 's for real  / 
That really happened  / 
And one time 0 I can remember  , I think 0 it was Steve , my brother , um , / 
he , /- 
and they would give treats like candy , / 
I do n't even remember what all kinds of prizes they would give  . / 
But for some reason , and I think 0 this is really true , he got ice cream sandwiches  / 
Like a box of ice cream sandwiches . / 
And of course there 's nothing 0  to do  with a box of ice cream sandwiches when you 're at a 2 - hour movie   / 
They 're going  to melt  / 
And another , um , /- 
<disfluency> that was in , </disfluency> that was in High Point ,  / 
And then we moved to Charlotte / 
and we used  to go to -- and I do n't think 0 it 's even still there I do n't know if the building is or not -- but the Dilworth Theatre . / 
I lived in the Dilworth area , / 
and we would go to the Dilworth Theatre / 
and I do remember that it  cost 9 cents  to get a ticket  to get in . / 
And we <disfluency> would </disfluency> , could go to the movie . / 
We would get maybe 15 cents each  to go to the movie , / 
and I sound like I 'm 95 years old -- with those kinds of prices . / 
Um , but we would go to the movie / 
and then you would go in and get <disfluency> your </disfluency> , your snack that you wanted  . / 
And there were several different choices . / 
I do n't ever remember  getting popcorn at the movie until I was a teenager or in my adult life . / 
But we would , uh , buy , /- 
lollipops is what they call them   now , / 
but we called them  suckers / 
and we would get often a 2 - cent sucker . / 
 
Are you making fun ? / 
 
No , I love this story . / 
And the 2 - cent suckers is what  is referred to  now as a Tootsie Roll Pop . / 
And we called them  2 - cent suckers because every other sucker cost a penny . / 
Except these were 2 cents because they had the Tootsie Roll in the middle . / 
And there was one other sucker that  cost a nickel / 
and we called that  an all day sucker , just because you could n't eat the whole thing for the entire movie and you would really just have that sucker all day long . / 
And one other form of refreshment that we got  , which  really embarrassed my mother because she did n't know anything about this until she went with us to the movie one Saturday , /- 
there was a bakery next door to the movie theatre . / 
And my brothers and myself were not the only people that  did this : ; / 
all the kids that  would go to the movie knew  to do this . / 
We would go into the bakery / 
and we would ask for -- a nickel worth of scraps  / 
And we did n't even have  to ask for it because the bakery lady knew us and she knew  to have all this ready for all the kids going to the movie . / 
And what it was  it was broken cookies and broken pieces of whatever  happened while they were baking , mistakes . / 
So they would fill little bags for us / 
and we would give them a nickel / 
and we could take that to the movie theatre with us . / 
And that 's all the stories 0 I can remember  about the movies right now . / 
I do know that I did used  to go the movie downtown at the Carolina Theatre . / 
And when I was young  , it  was n't a strange thing for the kids to just go off and go to a movie . / 
I mean , my mother knew where we were going  / 
and she knew when we would get back  , / 
but today you would n't send your seven or eight year old child to a movie theatre alone even if they were with their nine year old brother : ; / 
you just would n't do it . / 
And we could skate to the movie or ride a bicycle to the movie / 
and we would do that , . Which  is kind of sad that you ca n't do that anymore / 
and it 's not just because <disfluency> things are </disfluency> , there 're bad people in the world but it 's too much traffic . / 
You have  to check everything about a movie , check it out  to see what the content is  / 
and  just was n't like that when I was growing up  . / 
Also about that same time period in my life , I guess again between seven and ten years old , which  seems  to be what I remember  most vividly , my best friend uh , was Kathy Josey , / 
and she was a next door neighbor also , / 
and we remained friends up until , uh , she was about 35 / 
and she passed away with cancer . / 
But <disfluency> we </disfluency> , we remained close friends . / 
In fact we shared an apartment , first apartment 0 either one of us ever had  . / 
And when we were , um , little girls  we used  to play " Career Girls "  / 
We did *?*  / 
And we used  to try  to dress up and pretend 0 we were businesswomen . / 
And we would go to work and pretend 0 we had an apartment together / 
and then when we grew up  , we sure did *?* : ; / 
we got an apartment . / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
 
Um , Kathy and I also used  to play other kind of dress ups / 
and <disfluency> it just </disfluency> , <disfluency> it seems like </disfluency> , I remember 0 we both had like our mother 's long skirts , / 
or the skirts would be long on us / 
and we would literally wear dress up clothes that  belonged to our mothers . / 
But <disfluency> we had </disfluency> , Kathy had one pair of pearls or beads of some sort of necklace that  was her mother 's / 
and I did n't have the necklace . / 
And it was really beautiful / 
and I really , really wanted one . / 
So we only had the one necklace / 
and <disfluency> we </disfluency> , er , we decided , /- 
I do n't know if it was *?* jointly or if Kathy was just extremely nice or whatever , / 
but she said 0 I could wear it part of the time . / 
And we would literally time the amount of time 0 we wore it  like 30 minutes or 15 minutes or whatever . / 
And the way 0 we decided who  got  to wear it first  , /- 
and this always kind of bothered me because I know 0 Kathy did this intentionally , / 
she said 0 the youngest one got  to wear it first / 
and she was like six months younger than I am *?* . / 
So , <disfluency> it </disfluency> , that became a normal thing with us . / 
Whenever we only had one of something  she would always say , " Well , I think 0 the youngest one gets  to do it , or wear it or whatever first . " / 
And , that just always stuck in my mind , that <disfluency> in </disfluency> , in our adult life I brought that up to her / 
and she sort of acted like she did n't know anything about that / 
and I thought to myself , " she does *?* , " / 
and then she laughed about it / 
and she realized that she had kinda held a trump card on that one . / 
Um , also we did a lot of pretending / 
and as I said *?* we played career girls and the dress ups . / 
And my sister and I used  to pretend also / 
and Jill is about 2  years younger than I am *?* , maybe two and a half , / 
and we used  to play Robin Hood except we did n't have a Maid Marion , / 
we had a Saretha , / 
I do n't know where in the world that name came from  . / 
But we would switch playing Robin Hood , / 
one would play Robin Hood / 
and one would play Saretha . / 
And Saretha was the counter , / 
 would be the same thing as Maid Marion , / 
and , <disfluency> why </disfluency> , again , I do n't know why we did n't use Maid Marion  . / 
But in my mind I can remember  playing that , like all day long . / 
And we would go over to my grandparents ' / 
and they had <disfluency> a </disfluency> a big white house with a big front porch and , uh , banisters on it and a lot of rocking chairs out on the front porch . / 
And it was just a great place 0  to pretend  / 
and we would climb up on the porch and on the banisters / 
and we could make those our horses / 
or , uh , it could be a castle : ; / 
just do many things with it . / 
Um , and when we were still living in High Point  in our back yard we had a huge , /- 
I do n't know , / 
I guess 0 it was an oak tree , / 
but it was a really big tree , / 
but it was a climbable tree . / 
And it had real large , thick branches extending out to the side / 
and they were fat enough branches where as a child of eight and nine years old we could straddle the branches  . / 
And that was another game that Jill and I used  to play  : ; / 
we would pretend 0 we were in the jungle / 
and we would climb up on the tree / 
and we would straddle the tree branches and pretend 0 it was our elephant . / 
And in the yard , we had an old tree that  had been cut  down / 
and just the stump was remaining / 
and my mother had planted , um , flowers all around that stump / 
and we would use that stump <disfluency> as a </disfluency> , as a throne / 
and the princess got  to sit up on that stump on that throne and have all those flowers around her / 
and that would be the throne / 
and she would be the queen or the princess or whatever . / 
When I was a teenager  , an Audrey Hepburn movie  came out called *   Wait Until Dark . / 
And I think 0 I was probably 16 or 17 years old : ; / 
we were of driving age . / 
And I had a group of girlfriends that I ran around with  / 
and <disfluency> there were </disfluency> , golly , there might 've been 8 to 10 of us who  were good friends . / 
Everybody had their own " best " friend / 
but then we had one big group that  we used  to do a lot of things together . / 
Um , and we <disfluency> would </disfluency> , had that many girls / 
but we would only go out in a couple of cars / 
and I remember one of the girls , Betty Belle , / 
her dad had a Beetle , / 
and we 'd fit like 5 girls in that Beetle . / 
 
Did Betty Belle turn Catholic ? / 
 
No , huh-uh . / 
 
She did n't *?* ? / 
 
No . / 
So we went out one night to the movie , / 
but before we went to the movie we went  to get pizza / 
and then we went to , 
and I think 0 the name of the place was The Open Kitchen , / 
and we did n't have chain pizza places  like we do *?* now , like Pizza Hut and all that . / 
This was just a really neat pizza place that all the kids would go  . / 
And we went to Open Kitchen / 
and we would have eight or 10 girls / 
and we would order one pizza and all share it / 
and everyone would only get one piece / 
and I think 0 we would make the waitresses mad because we did n't have money  to leave tips . / 
We would also drink water . / 
So it was n't a good situation for the waitresses , / 
but we had fun / 
and we did n't even think about it . / 
We just did what we could get away with  . / 
Anyway , that night we were gon  na go  see  Wait Until Dark / 
and I think 0 it was on at the Manor Theatre , / 
and I just remember 0 when you have like 10 or so girls going <disfluency> somewhere </disfluency> to the same place  it 's <disfluency> kind of a </disfluency> , pretty much of a spectacle : ; / 
we 're all in this long line / 
and we 're giggling and laughing and cutting up and having really a great time . / 
So we bought our tickets / 
and we went into the Manor Theatre / 
and we found a row of seats / 
and we <disfluency> sat </disfluency> , <disfluency> file </disfluency> , all filed in . / 
<disfluency> And I just remember seeing </disfluency> , and I was sitting in a middle section , / 
I was not on an end so I had girls 0 I knew  on both sides of me . / 
And I just remember 0 that movie <disfluency> was </disfluency> , had a lot of hype about  being really scary and suspenseful / 
and it 's nothing like these movies that  are out today like Scream and , what is it  ? Nightmare on Elm Street whatever it is  , where they 're actual horror movies  . / 
This was , uh , a real intense , um , drama and , just very scary : ; / 
 kept you on the edge of your seat . / 
And there was a scene in the movie 0 I remember  where every one of us , and it was n't just our group , but so many people in the theatre , they screamed out at one time  . / 
And that 's really all 0 I remember  about that night , / 
it was just a lot of fun . / 

There is a much - quoted saying , attributed * to the epidemiologist Geoffrey Rose : “ large number of people exposed * to a small risk may generate many more cases than a small number exposed * to a very high risk . ” 
This is true for many individual risk factors such as salt intake  linked * to high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease  and speeding on the highway  linked * to injuries and accidents  . 
Does it apply to many other global health risks ? 
The study by Anthony Rodgers and colleagues suggests that it does *?* . 
 To develop effective health policies , one must understand the existing health risks and disease burdens . 
On a worldwide scale , this is a tough challenge . 
The Global Burden of Disease Database , maintained * by the World Health Organization    , collects data  from countries around the world on risk factors such as tobacco , malnutrition , childhood abuse , unsafe sex , childbirth , and cholesterol levels , as well as on disease burdens , for example depression , blindness , and diarrhea . 
large group of scientists from all over the world has developed a framework  to analyze these data . 
 To compare different risks or burdens , they calculate disability - adjusted life-years , or DALYs : — the number of healthy life years lost * because of a particular disease or risk factor . 
Rodgers and colleagues used data from the database for 26 risk factors and from 14 epidemiological subregions of the world  to calculate the proportion of risk-factor - attributable disease burden in different population subgroups defined * by age , sex , and exposure level . 
For  being underweight in childhood , for example : — the leading risk factor for global loss of healthy life : — they found that only 35 % of the disease burden occurred in severely underweight children , the rest occurred in those only moderately underweight . 
The relative risks for the moderately underweight are much lower , but the number of children in that category is so large that the total attributable burden amounted to almost two-thirds of the total global burden of disease for that risk factor . 
The analysis confirms  : — and extends to a global level  : — previous research showing that many major health risks are important across the range of exposure levels , not just among individuals exposed * to high levels of risk . 
It also points to risk factors that  are particularly prevalent among specific populations and age groups , and for which highly targeted interventions could be effective  . 
 
 
 Welcome back to our show  / 
. / 
This is Maria , / 
and I do n't know your last name . / 
 
Polk . / 
 
Oh that 's good . / 
From Polkton , Maria Polk . / 
. / 
And where did you grow up  ? / 
Were you born  in this area here ? / 
 
I was born  in Cottonville , . Right outside of Norwood in Stanley County . / 
 
Oh ,  . / 
When you were little  , did your mom read you books , / 
or did somebody read you books in your house ? / 
 
My mama read to me and my sister . / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
What kind of books were your favorites  ? / 
Do you remember any that  were maybe a real favorite of yours ? / 
 
Mm , I kind of liked them all . / 
Um , I did n't really have a favorite . / 
 
No ? / 
Any particular types , like ones with pictures or . /- 
Can you think of a story that they told you  that you liked for them to read  over and over ? 
 
Um , I think 0 my favorite was like , " Little Red Riding Hood : ; " / 
I loved that book . / 
 
" Little Red Riding Hood " ? / 
So when you read to yourself  did you read different stories than the ones 0 they would read  to you ? / 
 
Mmm , basically , something different . / 
 
Did you get  to go to the library when you were little  ? / 
 
Uh-huh , all the time . / 
 
Yeah . / 
So , you would check books out ? / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
Mostly , I liked  to spend time  reading encyclopedias --  Oh , really ? /  -- when I was little  . / 
 
You like  to read encyclopedias . / 
In your family , do you remember if there was any storyteller ? / 
 
Well , my uncle was always telling stories / 
and , uh , we had this house across the street from where I grew up  that  was old / 
and he never finished it . / 
He started it / 
and he told stories that , um , um , men being in it that house at night and stuff and for us not to go outside at night . / 
 
Would he scare you ? / 
 
Yeah . / 
So <disfluency> we </disfluency> , at a certain time , we were scared  to go over there because we 'd always go outside and look at the house across the street . / 
 
Um , did he tell stories to big groups of people , or just one - on - one ? / 
 
Just to our cousins and all of us that  hung around each other all the time . / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
Now , do you have kids at your house ? / 
 
No . / 
<disfluency> Only </disfluency> , only on Sunday : my niece and nephew and my cousins . / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
Do you like  to read to them ? / 
Do they bring their books over ? / 
 
I read to my niece . / 
She likes the pop-out books . / 
 
Uh-huh . / 
How old is she  ? / 
 
She 's , ah six . / 
She likes the pictures that  pop out at you . / 
She likes for me to read them to her . / 
 
Can she read to herself yet ? / 
 
Not yet , / 
but she tries  to *?* . / 
Mostly , she just looks at the pictures . / 
 
<disfluency> Is she </disfluency> , what grade is she in  ? / 
Do you know ? / 
 
She 's in kindergarten . / 
 
She 's in kindergarten ? / 
. / 
That 's pretty much all 0 I need  to know  , about how you liked reading and things when you were little   . / 
Is there anything else 0 you 'd like  to say  about this , that  comes to your mind ? / 
 
 
 
Hi my name is Sandra Reid / 
and I am part of a family of seven children , um , / 
and my mom and dad have passed away . / 
During our young years we were very poor . / 
We did not have very much / 
but my mom always found a way 0  to keep us  busy or keep us  entertained  , / 
and one of the ways that she kept us  entertained  was by  telling stories , reading poems , and singing to us . / 
One of the stories that I would like  to share  with you is the story that  is pretty scary / 
and it sticks out into my mind , I guess , <disfluency> mostly </disfluency> , mainly because it was scary . / 
Even though my mom told us lot of scary stories she was always there  to hold us in her arms and let us know that the story was not true and that <disfluency> it was </disfluency> we were  . / 
Out of all of my sisters and brothers I was the laziest one of all  , as far as  working around the house . / 
All of my sisters learned  to cook by the age of eight . / 
I learned after I got married / 
so I was a pretty lazy child when it came down to  cleaning up and cooking  . / 
So one night my mother asked me  to go inside and wash the dishes . / 
Naturally , I start  crying , / 
and one of my main ways of  getting out of work was always saying 0 something hurt me , either my stomach , or that I had a headache , or something was wrong with my leg . / 
Just anything  to get out of  doing my job . / 
So after she noticed that I was going  to be just a little stubborn and not <disfluency> follow </disfluency> , do what she tell told me  to do  , she asked me  to come around in the living room with her and the rest of the family . / 
So she began  to tell this story . / 
Once upon a time there was this little girl and her family . / 
And the mother asked the little girl  to please go in and wash the dishes so that she could go to bed early and not <disfluency> come up </disfluency> , wake up in the morning and see all those dishes on the table . / 
And her little girl just complained , " I do n't want  to wash the dishes . / 
I do n't want  to *?* . / 
My leg hurts , / 
my head hurts . / 
I do n't feel good . " / 
The little girl disappointed her mother so badly , / 
but her mother said , " How in the world am I ever going  to get her to wash these dishes  ? " / 
So she said , " Little girl , little girl , if you do n't go in there and wash those dishes like I asked you , something really , really bad is going  to happen to you . " / 
So the little girl just said , "  I 'll go in there and wash the dishes . " / 
And she was in there  stomping and crying and mad and taking all her good time . / 
All of a sudden the butcher knife came out of the drawer / 
and it began  to roll around in the air . / 
And before you know it , the butcher knife came around and cut the little girl 's head off . / 
And when the little girl went to heaven  she was crying down to her dad and saying " Daddy , Daddy , ! Mama cut my head off with the butcher knife . " / 
Now that knife , when I went  to sleep  it really scared me . / 
But the wonderful thing about it my mom was always there close by  to let me know that I was  . / 
Now after that , my mother continued  to tell us many , many scary stories and tell us many , many , many poems . / 
I 'd like  to tell you about how I got into  becoming a teacher 's assistant  . / 
All my life I always wanted  to be a teacher even from the time 0 I started to school  . / 
That  was my dream ,  to teach school . / 
As I told you *?* , in the past we were a very poor family / 
and I never got the chance  to go to college because of this . / 
Uh , while I was in high school a teacher of mine noticed that I had an extra bone in my foot / 
and she said , " Well now Sandra we can use this as get toward , on your grant  to go to college . " / 
So she said , "  Go home / 
and  talk to your mother about it / 
and  see if we , you know , can follow through with  applying for a <disfluency> grant </disfluency> , scholarship grant for you . " / 
So that night I went home / 
and I asked my mother about it / 
and she said , " Baby , I really want you to go to college . / 
It  's always been my dream that my children all go to school . / 
But because there are so many children in the family there are other things 0 you 're going  to have  to have   to go to school / 
and I just do n't have the money . " / 
At that time my dad was in prison at the time , / 
so it made it really hard for my mom . / 
I sat there / 
and I cried / 
but I tried  to be as understanding as possible because I knew 0 my mother struggled really hard  to even keep food on the table for us . / 
So I never got a chance  to go to school . / 
 
Did anybody *?* ? / 
 
Yes , my brother went to school . / 
He went to Livingstone and then <disfluency> to </disfluency> transferred to Johnson Smith , <disfluency> so </disfluency>  to make it easier on my mom , <disfluency> to </disfluency> , as far as , you know , him staying at home and going to school too . / 
So he graduated from , um , Johnson Smith , here in Charlotte . / 
I had another sister who  went to Gaston College where she got a business degree there  . / 
<disfluency> I </disfluency> , in later years , I went on to college some / 
but I did n't complete the , uh , whole four years . / 
Um , I remember once , when I was working in a mill , and I was spinning yarn , and I was saying to myself , and , I was praying actually  , and I said , " God , one day I want  to work in the school system . / 
If I could just work , even as a teacher assistant I would be happy . " / 
As the years went by my prayer was answered  / 
and I got the chance  to work in the cafeteria as a cashier / 
and the principal there came up to me and said , " Have you considered  being a teacher assistant ? " / 
I said , " I would love  to *?* . " / 
So they told me about some classes that I could take  at Central Piedmont . / 
I 'd never gone to college before . / 
I was really afraid . / 
But he told me  to go ahead and try it , / 
so I took the entrance test , / 
and they accepted me <disfluency> into </disfluency> at the school , / 
and I took some courses there . / 
After a while , the principal said , " I would like for you to bring me your , um , transcript so I can see what your grades are like  . " / 
Luckily I had all As . / 
I did very well . / 
And he asked me  to be a teacher assistant the next following year . / 
Um , <disfluency> my dream </disfluency> , my prayers were answered  . / 
I enjoy my job very much . / 
I ca n't think of any job that  would make me any happier . / 
few years later , um , I had the opportunity  to apply for a scholarship  to further my education . / 
At first I did n't want  to apply for it , / 
but the principal called me during the summer months and said , " Sandra the time is running out , / 
you need  to apply . " / 
And he told me 0 I would have  to write this paper . / 
Well I did n't like  writing at the time / 
but I took it  upon myself  to go ahead and write a paper . / 
And I went to , um , one of my staff members / 
and I asked her if she would proofread it , / 
and she thought 0 it was an excellent paper . / 
And I went ahead and mailed it in  thinking uh 0 I wo n't get the scholarship . / 
Who  cares ? / 
I do n't *?* , / 
just so I can work in the school I 'll be happy . / 
But one day I came in / 
and I looked at my mail / 
and I was accepted  . / 
I could n't believe it . / 
Out of 150 assistants who  had applied for this grant only 16  got the opportunity , / 
so I felt very proud of myself . / 
So I went on and took the courses , / 
and as I started I think 0 I was taking economics . / 
I think 0 that was the last class 0 I took  . / 
My husband became very ill with cancer / 
and I had  to make a decision as to whether I would continue my education or take care of him / 
and I felt like I needed  to take care of him because he stood by me so much while I was going to school . / 
 
But you would have been able  to be <disfluency> a </disfluency> , a teacher if you had continued ? / 
 
Yeah , / 
and at the time , I was also working in the classroom , . I guess 0 you 'd say as a sub because the teacher that I was working with  at that time was pregnant and she had  to take a leave of absence . / 
And they hired a sub / 
but the sub did n't do that much . / 
I had  to take over the classroom . / 
So I worked maybe like four months in the classroom / 
and that highly put a damper on my wanting  to be a teacher from all the responsibility along with the fact that I was taking care of a very sick husband . / 
<disfluency> After all of this was </disfluency> , after <disfluency> I </disfluency> , I decided  not to continue I 've never pursued the fact of  going back to school . / 
I just got to a certain age / 
and I said , " No I ca n't do this anymore , " / 
so I never went back . / 
But I love what I do  / 
and , uh , anytime 0 I get a chance  to teach in a classroom  I go for it / 
so . /- 
 
How many different schools did you teach at  ? / 
 
I 've only worked at <disfluency> two </disfluency> , two schools . / 
The first school 0 I worked at  was Enderly Park / 
and then it was closed  down . / 
So I was in those situations where I <disfluency> first </disfluency> , <disfluency> come first </disfluency> , <disfluency> transfer last </disfluency> , come first  to transfer out  . 
So I had  to *?* , / 
I was offered  a job at Ashley Park or Berryhill / 
and I chose Berryhill . / 
I did n't particularly want  to come here / 
and when I came here  everybody noticed that I was really , really sad because I loved  being at Enderly Park . / 
But then , after a while , I fell in love with Berryhill . / 
If I 'm not mistaken I think 0 I 've been at Berryhill for I think 17 years , / 
17 , 18 years I 've been here at Berryhill / 
so /- 
and I hope 0 I never have  to leave until I retire . / 
 
And why did the other school close down  ? / 
 
Um , <disfluency> the </disfluency> , you know , I really do n't know . / 
Um , <disfluency> that </disfluency> , I really do n't know why they closed that school down  because it was a really nice school and everything , / 
but they eventually tore it down because /- 
<disfluency> I was there </disfluency> I think 0 the first year 0 I went there  was the year 0 they built a really nice gym  , / 
and I do n't think 0 they used that gym no more than three years . / 
I really do n't *?* , / 
I do n't remember why that school was ever closed   / 
but it was *?* . / 
And I enjoy what I do  . / 
That 's it . / 
 
All right  thank you . / 
 

 
My name is Bonnie Rindner / 
and I was born  in San Antonio ,  , / 
and the story 0 I 'm going  to tell  is about my mother . / 
Um , a little background first . / 
<disfluency> Her </disfluency> ,  let 's see , her mother 's family were wealthy people at one time . / 
They owned car dealerships and extensive land . / 
Um , I do n't know if they were farmers or not , / 
but I know 0 they were land owners , um , many acres / 
and , um , her grandmother was raised  in wealth . / 
Uh , then the Depression came / 
and apparently everyone lost all their money . / 
Um , she was raised  in  , / 
and she married a man , / 
this is my grandmother 0 I 'm talking about  . / 
And they were very poor by this point , / 
and they had , I think *?* , seven children . / 
And one particular Christmas , things were very , very difficult . / 
There was no money 0  to buy any presents at all , um , for the children  , / 
and my grandfather , who  was killed  when my mother was 16  , this was , of course , way before that , um , he must have been a very positive person because what he did  with the situation was <disfluency> he </disfluency> , he told the children that there were no presents this Christmas because they had given them all to Santa  to take the poor children / 
and this made the children feel happy and proud of themselves / 
and it  gave them a good feeling that they had done something very nice for someone less fortunate than themselves . / 
Um , I felt like that was a way 0  to face that situation with such hope and with joy and with love  . / 
And although I never met my grandfather , I have never forgotten that story / 
and when I hear of him  I think what a wonderful , wonderful person he must have been  . / 
 
And how long have you lived in Charlotte  ? / 
 
Oh , I have lived in Charlotte , um , for a year . / 
Um , I lived in Charlotte for five years . / 
We came here in 1986 , / 
we lived here for five years , / 
then we moved to Raleigh for seven years / 
and now we 've been back one year . / 
 
 
 
uh how do you feel about gun control  / 
 
uh on the scale 0 they gave  one to ten I 'd say 0 I 'm probably a four  / 
<disfluency> I 'm not totally </disfluency> I 'm not one of these people that  believes that we should not be able  to buy guns / 
but I do n't think 0 we should be carrying Uzis either / 
you know what I mean  / 
yeah I know / 
I mean I do n't think /- 
machine guns automatic weapons I do n't believe in things like that / 
 
but I think --  some people do I know 0  /  -- that everyone should have the right  to have a hand gun in their house if they so choose / 
<disfluency> and </disfluency> but I think 0 there should be some restrictions when you buy one  you know / 
they should do more background search on you / 
they should *?* / 
I think 0 it  should be harder  to buy one 
 
right / 
 
yeah there 's a lot of crazies out there that  can just go in and buy a gun because they do n't really ask a lot of questions when you walk into those stores  / 
 
yeah / 
 
no they do n't *?* / 
they do n't ask anything except how old you are  I do n't think / 
that 's kind of scary / 
 
I 'm from California / 
<disfluency> my mom </disfluency> the last time 0 I <disfluency> was </disfluency> like purchased a gun  <disfluency> my </disfluency> my mom was getting a rifle for my brother that he wanted  like an antique one / 
and --  uh-huh /  -- <disfluency> they </disfluency> he had  to fill out some forms / 
but I guess 0 California might be tougher / 
I do n't know / 
 
yeah they might be *?* / 
or you know how we are here in Texas  / 
it 's like everybody 's a hunter so /- 
I 'm not much of a hunter / 
but --  yeah /  -- it 's /- 
 
I 've never even bought a gun myself / 
my dad 's given it to me / 
or someone 's given me one / 
so I 'm probably real illegal you know  carrying guns that  are n't even mine / 
 
yeah <disfluency> it 's a </disfluency> it 's a hard decision 0  to make  / 
 
it really is *?* / 
uh the only problem  0 I have  with gun control is that <disfluency> they </disfluency> the radicals wan  na ban all kinds of weapons and then the only people carrying guns are gon  na <disfluency> be </disfluency> be the people who  are gon  na kill you anyway / 
 
like the bumper sticker / 
it 's true yeah / 
 
yeah exactly right / 
it really is *?* because they 're gon  na get them one way or another / 
they will always have a way / 
 look at drugs / 
they always have a way 0  to get that  so /- 
 
right / 
right / 
right / 
 
and they 're illegal / 
so I do n't think 0 it  would do us any good  to outlaw them all together 
 
no <disfluency> I </disfluency> yeah <disfluency> I I I I </disfluency> I agree that it would be like 0 <disfluency> people in </disfluency> people that  are uh criminals are the ones that  are gon  na get them / 
and then you have no defense against these people when they do come into your house or something  / 
 
right / 
that 's true / 
I think 0 they ought  to teach people how  to shoot them  too how  to take care of one  how  to act around one  when they buy them  / 
 
yeah I <disfluency> have have </disfluency> <disfluency> gun gun </disfluency> <disfluency> have </disfluency> have gun management 101 / 
 
right yeah exactly / 
you can not take the gun home until you 've taken this course / 
 sign up here / 
something like that / 
 
yeah / 
or <disfluency> required required </disfluency> required * for every college student oh / 
 
right / 
exactly / 
before graduation / 
 
God gun control / 
<disfluency> it 's </disfluency> it 's such a heated topic in <disfluency> the </disfluency> the /- 
and people get so emotional about it 
 
yep / 
oh yeah they do *?* / 
they get real emotional about it all the /- 
I 've worked with a lot of people that  hunt 
and <disfluency> they just </disfluency> <disfluency> they </disfluency> they do n't see any sense in it at all / 
they think 0 it  's ridiculous  to have any kind of gun control / 
but then of course they 're hunters / 
they know what they 're doing  / 
they do n't realize 0 there 're a bunch of crazy people out there that /- 
 
some of them are crazy too / 
whew yeah yeah / 
they go out there and get drunk and start  shooting / 
 
 do n't use it for that / 
well yeah that 's true / 
they shoot each other  thinking 0 they 're a deer / 
yeah / 
darn I thought 0 you were a deer Bob / 
sorry my mistake / 
 
yeah Marge I do n't know what  happened to your husband / 
he just never came back / 
 
 looked like antlers / 
I do n't know / 
 
yep that happens a lot too / 
 
yeah / 
oh / 
 
but I guess 0 that 's it / 
that 's my opinion on it / 
so what now / 
 
I 'm not sure / 
 
uh uh I think 0 we just hang up / 
yeah okay / 
thanks bye / 
 
<disfluency> I </disfluency>  let 's see / 
yeah yeah we just say good-bye and hang up / 
okay okay okay / 
thanks / 
 
 
have you ever got one of those calls that  's either generated  by a computer or somebody going down a list and they 're either offering a service or they 're introducing some new product in the area / 
and normally when they call  you 're either in the shower or you in the middle of  cooking something and you had  to stop everything  to run to the phone / 
 
yes yes / 
that is that one that you were talking about  / 
 
that was the big one 0 I 'm talking about  / 
I work weird hours / 
and invariably just about the time 0 I 'm going to sleep  the phone tears off the wall / 
 
uh-huh uh-huh / 
 
and you 're trying  to crawl out of a half unconscious sleep and answer the phone / 
you either hear the click as soon as you say hello / 
you hear the click of the recording coming on / 
 
um-hum / 
 
or you hear somebody already starting <disfluency> reading </disfluency>  reading off a list of stuff that they 've read  probably a thousand times that day already / 
 
that 's true / 
or the ones that  <disfluency> are </disfluency> are generated  by a computer / 
it 's just a computer voice that  comes on the line / 
those are the ones that I really really hate  too / 
 
 even had some of them / 
<disfluency> the </disfluency> they 're voice activated / 
and you 've got  to say hello twice before they 'll do anything / 
 
uh-huh uh-huh / 
yeah sometimes <disfluency> I </disfluency> I get them on my uh answering machine at home / 
so -/ 
and I hate that when I 've got a whole bunch of messages and I go through them and most of them are n't from anybody at all  / 
 
what I would love  to see  done   to stop all of this -/ 
 
uh-huh 
 
we 've got a thing in this country / 
you can have your phone number unlisted / 
 
um-hum / 
 
I think 0 a law should be passed  to where any of these people  -/ 
I think 0 it  's great <disfluency> that </disfluency> you know freedom of speech in this country and everything / 
but if they 're going  to offer these services or these recorded message everything they ought  to be stuck  working with the phone book like everybody else instead of using a computer  to go through and just go down every sequence of numbers for this certain area code and call them / 
 
um-hum / 
yeah / 
see I have an unlisted telephone number / 
but I still get all of those calls / 
and then some of them are speaking in a foreign language that I do n't even understand  / 
so yeah I do *?* / 
I really feel that that 's uh an invasion of my privacy / 
I agree with you on that particular subject there / 
 let me see / 
 
that 's about that as far as any other everyday occurrences / 
I put a stop to some of them as far as the door-to-door either religious groups or people --  um-hum /  -- peddling products / 
if I wanted their products I would 've either gone to the store  to bought it / 
or I would 've called for their <disfluency> salesman </disfluency> salesman to come out / 
 
um-hum um-hum / 
 
yeah that 's true / 
 living in an apartment complex though you know <disfluency> you ca n't </disfluency> um you ca n't really stop those people from  coming around even though they put up signs  out front that  says no solicitations / 
uh but they still come up to the front door and uh you know walk around / 
so usually what I do  is I 'll call the apartment manager and tell him hey there 's people coming around you know / 
and they 're trying  to sell something / 
<disfluency> or </disfluency> or they 're from a religious organization / 
and I really hate that / 
I really really do *?* / 
I had somebody come to the door about two weeks ago / 
and um gosh it was about nine o 'clock at night too / 
it was n't even what I would consider  you know a family hour / 
it 's time 0  to you know start  going to bed  / 
<disfluency> and </disfluency> uh and it was somebody from um oh what was it  the uh Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints / 
and uh I 've read a lot about uh that particular sect / 
and I do n't particularly care for it / 
so I especially do n't like for them to come up to my door and try and talk to me / 
 
now I agree with their right  to um pursue their religion of choice in <disfluency> that </disfluency> whatever manner they want  to *?*  / 
but I think 0 they also should respect the sanctity of the American home whether it be in a house or in an apartment / 
 
um-hum / 
 
I 'm on my turf / 
if I want them there I 'll call for them / 
otherwise I do n't want  to know 0 they exist / 
 
right / 
 
yeah yeah / 
no <disfluency> I </disfluency> I agree with you there though / 
I mean they want  to choose that particular religion then that 's fine with me too you know as long as they do n't try and pull me in and drag me in / 
<disfluency> and </disfluency> and I do n't like the way that they do it  either / 
<disfluency> and </disfluency> and it 's their mission <disfluency> as they do </disfluency> as they go door-to-door / 
and they go out into the public / 
and they actually have the uh teenagers serving two years like you would say like in an army and two years in  going around and doing missionary type work / 
and I do n't know / 
<disfluency> I just </disfluency> um I just do n't particularly care for that at all / 
and <disfluency> that </disfluency> that 's one thing that I feel really strongly about  though is uh you know people  coming up to my door especially religious organizations and wanting  <disfluency> to </disfluency> uh you know to try and get me to join or you know become interested in their religion because I have my own / 
 
now the part about where you said 0 the apartment complex puts up signs that  says no soliciting  I 've even gone so far as  to put that / 
I 've got a storm door on the front of the house / 
and I 've put in -/ 
I do n't know how much clearer it can be  / 
it 's a red sign with silver letters saying no soliciting / 
I should have guessed / 
I guess 0 I should make another one that  says religious or otherwise because I still get -/ 
 
yeah yeah that 's true yeah / 
no <disfluency> I do n't </disfluency> uh <disfluency> I do n't have </disfluency> I did n't go that far / 
but uh yeah I probably could do the same thing uh you know / 
I do n't have a storm door / 
but I 'm sure 0 I could rig up something / 
but you know I do n't think that that would stop people / 
I mean it 's like <disfluency> they </disfluency> they see that word and it says uh go instead of stop / 
oh goodness / 
 
 wonder if there 'd be some way 0 we could get these people that  do this get their names their addresses and their phone numbers and then reverse it and do -/ 
well that would be technically illegal / 
it 'd be harassment / 
 
oh gosh / 
 
but I consider invasion of my privacy --  yeah yeah /  -- a harassment in itself / 
 
yeah yeah yeah that 's true / 
that 's true / 
hm well what else / 
 
I believe 0 we 've pretty much summed everything up / 
 
I know / 
but I remember 0 <disfluency> you </disfluency> you talked about something / 
you started off / 
and you said -/ 
well  let me think / 
you talked about the telephone calls people coming and soliciting selling things at the door / 
you said something else / 
and I ca n't remember what it was  / 
and I thought yeah <disfluency> that </disfluency> that kind of touched a nerve right there / 
but <disfluency> we got </disfluency> uh we got to  talking about the um uh people coming to you at the front door / 
 
I 'm drawing the blank / 
 
oh goodness / 
okay is our five minutes up / 
 
uh pretty close to it / 
well I 've enjoyed  talking with you / 
 
pretty close / 
well it  was nice  talking to you too Jim / 
 
and  take it easy now / 
good night / 
 
okay / 
thanks / 
 
 
all right Amy . / 
how are you doing today  . / 
 
fine fine . / 
 
oh all righty . / 
i think 0 we know what we 're going  to speak about  . / 
um  tell you what . / 
i 'll start off . / 
how 's that  . / 
 
yeah . / 
okay you go ahead . / 
 
 
um i personally think  to set a mark with the judicial system and we 're talking about criminals criminal cases that they should bring back --  um-hum . /  -- hangings on weekends --  in public places . /  -- in public places . / 
there is one state that  does that by the way . / 
 
yeah . / 
really . / 
what is that  . / 
 
i want  to say Oklahoma . / 
i saw report something  the other night about it . / 
 
hm 
 
they do n't do them real often which  is obviously the death penalty . / 
 
yeah . / 
yeah . / 
 
um but i think 0 if we quit uh  building these Taj Mahals with the color TVs and <disfluency> sixty dollars </disfluency> sixty thousand a year 0  to keep an inmate in there <disfluency> on a on a </disfluency> on a life sentence we should start  hanging them and get it over with . / 
and  let 's just screwing up the system uh . / 
 
yeah . / 
well the sentences are so unbelievable . / 
i just saw on the news last night that they said 0 the average time 0 a sentenced murderer you know is in jail  is two years before he 's paroled  and a rapists is like six months and a burglar is like two months . / 
 
that 's pathetic . / 
that 's pathetic . / 
it 's . /- 
 
because they just say 0 there 's either no room in the system you know in the jails for them . / 
or you know it 's just that it seems like the automatic sentences <disfluency> if </disfluency> if a judge has leeway on what he 's going  to you know sentence someone for  between you know two months and uh fifty years and you know what  's his whim  to decide 0 it should be two months . / 
 
this is true . / 
<disfluency> and and and and </disfluency> and the way 0 the law reads  uh if they sentence you to --  you know it 's crazy . /  -- life in prison then he 's available for parole <disfluency> if it 's </disfluency> if it 's life and a day then he 's not eligible for parole . / 
so what . / 
you know  let 's quit  BSing with the system . / 
 
yeah . / 
well even if it 's life like you say *?* we end up  spending sixty thousand dollars a year  to keep some you know joker in there for life . / 
we could spend that money you know for starving children that  are starving or twelve million other things would be more useful than that . / 
 
exactly . / 
 
so to me if somebody has life you know beyond a reasonable doubt <disfluency> they should </disfluency> that should be it you know particularly for some of these really . /- 
 
a life for a life . / 
 
i mean there are so many just major major serial murders . / 
and it 's not just like one instance or something . / 
it  's just uh horrifying some of the murders that  go on . / 
 
the old Charles Manson case . / 
i mean the guy <disfluency> is really </disfluency> --  yeah . / and the . /- yeah . / there 's just . /- everyday you hear on the news of another one like that um . /-  -- just should n't be allowed  <disfluency> to </disfluency> to <disfluency> even </disfluency> even live . / 
uh about the issue about sentencing by the judge --  yeah . / um-hum . /  -- <disfluency> the </disfluency> the judge presently has an opportunity  to intervene uh <disfluency> when there 's </disfluency> uh my understanding when there 's uh a verdict  and it . /- 
for example there 's a hung jury here in Fort Worth . / 
two day in eight to four . / 
and bam bam the guy got off . / 
uh <disfluency> he was </disfluency> uh <disfluency> he </disfluency> he was a veterinarian and killed two a father and a son . / 
okay . / 
 
right . / 
yeah i heard about that on the news . / 
yeah . / 
 
um  kind of gets back to the second request 0 we 've been asked   to look at  . / 
is most criminal cases requiring an ananimous verdict . / 
<disfluency> the </disfluency> a situation like that i 'd say no  let 's just go like a regular vote . / 
eight to four tells me that <disfluency> there were eight </disfluency> there 's a <disfluency> percentage </disfluency> certain percentage of the people there with <disfluency> sixty percent of the people </disfluency> uh seventy percent of the people said hey . /- 
 
right . / 
rather than  have  to retrial the <disfluency> whole </disfluency> whole thing and spend all the money for people  to you know go back to court and all the lawyers . / 
and i mean it  just winds up  costing the taxpayers <disfluency> a fortune </disfluency> you know a fortune  to keep  doing that . / 
 
the guy 's guilty . / 
exactly . / 
 
 
and the victims you know the family of these people that  have been murdered  they just have  to have it dragged  on for years and years before they ever get any resolution . / 
 
exactly . / 
because it 's not next day 0 they have <disfluency> the start </disfluency> the trial which  is number of months and just prolongs the situation that much more  . / 
 
right . / 
yeah yeah . / 
 
i think <disfluency> that </disfluency> that <disfluency> if it 's </disfluency> if it 's not a split decision uh  go with the highest number and  let 's just get on with the program . / 
 
yeah yeah . / 
 
uh but as far as the sentencing by the judge i would have  to vote against that since there 's a jury because that 's what the juries are for  is  to make the decision . / 
um what are your feelings  . / 
 
yeah yeah . / 
well <disfluency> if i </disfluency> i saw on one of the talk shows this woman judge i believe from Florida . / 
and she just has just really stiff penalties . / 
and i saw that <disfluency> in </disfluency> in the hands of a judge that  really was conscientious and really you know took the pains  to give a sentence for what  was deserved  <disfluency> it could </disfluency> you could have <disfluency> a </disfluency> a judge that  would really make a good impact . / 
but likewise you could have the flip side and have some judge that  was paid  off or you know had <disfluency> good </disfluency> a good old boy network or for whatever reasons you know politics just let all kinds of people through . / 
so <disfluency> he </disfluency> he would have a heck  or she would have a heck  of a lot of power you know if  used  wrongly . / 
so at least the jury system does something 0  to prevent that you know or help <disfluency> it </disfluency> with it anyway . / 
i do n't know if it prevents it . / 
but  seems like the jury system does have its advantages . / 
but <disfluency> i also </disfluency> i 've also heard on trials that sometimes they go through like three hundred jurors before they hand pick these jurors that they think 0  are going  to be the ones that  are going  to be the most lenient you know . / 
and i do n't know how much they 're getting just a jury of their peers at that point  . / 
they 're really getting a select group . / 
it 's not just random people . / 
 
hm . / 
 
it almost should be 0 the first twelve people that they you know <disfluency> that </disfluency> have  on a list are the ones that  are on the jury . / 
and that 's it . / 
 
yeah yeah . / 
i get back to Price 's comment when he uh was found   guilty  . / 
he said well he did n't have any blacks uh you know from his neck of the woods . / 
well  give me a break you know . / 
 
you know . / 
 
he 'd have  to have his whole family up there for him to feel like he 's got his peers or something . / 
yeah . / 
 
exactly . / 
yeah yeah . / 
i mean <disfluency> you 're </disfluency> you 're in Dallas . / 
so everybody . /- 
i ca n't believe 0 they can uh . /- 
like in a murder situations they look for juries who  do n't know anything about the system well or know anything about <disfluency> the </disfluency> the occurrence . / 
you 'd have  to be pretty dense . / 
 
yeah . / 
 
you 'd <disfluency> be in </disfluency> have  to be in a cave  not to know what  's going on . / 
or  moving it to Lubbock or somewhere possibly is not the answer . / 
 
yeah . / 
oh they 'd have  to move it to Taiwan for people not to know about it practically . / 
 
this is true so true . / 
well this has been an interesting conversation . / 
 
yeah yeah . / 
well really this <disfluency> is </disfluency> breaks up my afternoon from  changing diapers and mopping floors . / 
i mean what can i say  . / 
no i 'm at home with two little kids preschoolers . / 
my husband works for  . / 
 
oh so you 're at the house . / 
you 're not at the plant . / 
oh  hold it . / 
oh that 's good . / 
that 's good . / 
i thought 0 i heard a holler there in the background . / 
but i was n't sure . / 
 
so yeah . / 
oh yeah i 've got the dog and two kids waiting here . / 
i am locked  up in the laundry room . / 
okay thanks a lot . / 
bye-bye . / 
 
oh goodness . / 
well i 'll let you get . /- 
i enjoyed it . / 
 
 
okay Ellen what kind of a car do you think 0 you 're going  to buy  / 
 
well as a matter of fact I was thinking about that the other day / 
and uh I really do n't know the answer um / 
 
I would sort of like  to uh think about something in the way of uh uh sort of a sporty car but <disfluency> not any </disfluency> not you know a luxury type sporty one but um --  yeah /  -- something that  still has a lots of amenities and you know gadgets and things / 
 
oh you do want a lot of that stuff / 
 
yeah well yeah <disfluency> I like </disfluency> I like some of those things / 
they come in really handy / 
 
what kind of uh things are you going  to consider  / 
you know what uh you said  / 
something <disfluency> about the </disfluency> about the /- 
well what do you call them   / 
you said amenities --  amenities /  -- that they have  / 
but what about um their reputation of the company or the price / 
 
um well of course I guess 0 uh price is always the big consideration / 
but -/ 
 
it is *?* for me / 
other people do n't seem  to have the same problem / 
 
yeah / 
 
well <disfluency> that 's </disfluency> that 's a big one in my book / 
but uh um --  yeah /  -- I have preferences <disfluency> for </disfluency> uh for some um makers over others um / 
and I would sort of like  to buy American / 
 
yeah / 
 
but you know I 'm not so totally hung up on that that I would n't buy something else / 
how about you / 
 
well um the last car 0 we bought  was American <disfluency> because of </disfluency> because of that reason / 
but  have not been entirely happy with um several things about the car / 
it does n't seem like the quality is quite as high as I expected it to be *?* --  oh really /  -- because several things minor things sort of -/ 
but still they cost us money um that we did n't feel like we should have had  to pay  on a car <disfluency> that </disfluency> that  was that new / 
 
um-hum / 
 
you know we bought the car  new / 
and after um well well well under two years we had  to replace the clutch / 
 
oh / 
 
and they just said well you know clutches are disposable / 
and I said since when / 
brake pads are disposable you know / 
we know that / 
but I never thought 0 a clutch was disposable / 
 
yeah yeah yeah / 
I would n't have thought so either / 
 
yeah so <disfluency> that was </disfluency> that was kind of a shock / 
 
oh / 
 
oh yeah <disfluency> I </disfluency> I guess 0 there 's a lot <disfluency> to </disfluency> 0  to think about  when you 're trying  to make that decision  / 
 
yeah you know <disfluency> the less </disfluency> actually the less 0 you spend  on a car -/ 
it seems like luxury cars they 're called   luxury cars even though they 're much more expensive <disfluency> like </disfluency> like uh um a Mercedes Benz they do n't have the history of  breaking down or things like that that  would go wrong would definitely not be considered  disposable / 
 
right / 
 
you would never think of  having  to replace the clutch in a Mercedes / 
 
no but then um -/ 
 
especially not after two years / 
 
no but on the other hand I guess too uh 0 whenever you do have  to have some major work done  on one of those  it costs a fortune / 
 
really / 
oh I do n't know / 
 
yeah I 've uh worked with a couple of people who  have owned uh various years uh Mercedes / 
and --  I think 0 that 's -/  I think 0 they have a really good um quality / 
 
um-hum my uh daughter has owned two different ones / 
and uh you know we 've had some work done  on them / 
but it 's not too bad / 
and <disfluency> the reason </disfluency> one of the reasons 0 we um bought the first one  was because a friend of ours had a Toyota that he just really drove  for years and years and years / 
and he lived way out in the country / 
so he put a lot of miles on it / 
 
um-hum / 
 
and you knew 0 it had had been through a whole lot / 
 
um-hum / 
 
and yet you know <disfluency> it </disfluency> it held up pretty doggone good / 
so -/ 
 
yeah / 
 
I thought 0 they would *?* / 
 
they seem  to be really durable / 
 
yeah / 
 
so I do n't know / 
<disfluency> I 'm </disfluency> I 'm not ready  to buy a new car yet / 
but I do n't know <disfluency> if </disfluency> if the next time I 'm going  to try <disfluency> to </disfluency>  to stay with  buying something American or if I 'm going  to go for a little more what I would consider  to be a long-term investment / 
 
yeah / 
 
well and I guess you know 0 you always have  to think about things like your gas mileage and stuff like that you know / 
you -/ 
 
oh it  's easy  to get gas mileage in this car / 
it gets excellent gas mileage / 
 
yeah / 
yeah that 's one of the big throwing cards for some of the foreign ones / 
 
um-hum / 
 
well we talked long enough / 
 
I think so / 
 
okay / 
well  enjoyed it / 
bye-bye / 
 
all righty / 
thanks / 
 
 
here goes  Sharon / 
 
okay / 
 
well what do you think  about Nolan Ryan being the first baseball player 0  to earn a million dollars / 
that 's the only thing 0 I found  out tonight / 
 
oh you found that out tonight / 
I had n't even heard that / 
that 's great / 
I think 0 he deserves every penny of it / 
 
yeah yeah / 
 
but there are some others out there that I do n't believe 0  deserve the money 0 they 're getting  / 
 
well is n't it  funny how baseball 's getting less than like football players would *?*  / 
 
oh yeah / 
 
 wonder because football -/ 
 
and <disfluency> they play a lot </disfluency> they play a lot longer season too / 
 
and a lot more games  right / 
 
yep that 's exactly right / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
but I think -/ 
 let 's see / 
the teams that  were there last year were see somebody from California / 
I do n't even know who  won the pennant last year / 
 
 beats me / 
I mean I know 0 Yankees have won a lot of games through the years / 
 
yeah / 
not lately though / 
 
we have been talking about this / 
I tried  to call earlier / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
and we had made a list of all these uh baseball teams and the cities that they were from  / 
then I started  cleaning / 
and I do n't know where I even put that paper  / 
<disfluency> I </disfluency> yeah I was just cleaning and throwing -/ 
 
 threw it away / 
oh gosh  let 's see / 
the teams that I think -/ 
the A's  were in it last year the Oakland A's / 
and I think 0 it was -/ 
I do n't think 0 it was an all California baseball / 
 
well have you ever played baseball / 
 
I play softball / 
 
well that 's what I did  when I was growing up  / 
 
yeah / 
 
that was fun / 
 
yeah that 's fun / 
that 's a whole different sport / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
yeah / 
 let 's see / 
but <disfluency> I think </disfluency> I think 0 the Rangers need  to go / 
and I think 0 the Pirates will go / 
and uh  let 's see / 
Rangers have got a new guy this year / 
I do n't remember his name either / 
 
do you ever go  see the Rangers / 
 
every once in a while / 
<disfluency> I </disfluency> I like  to go on the nights when there 's <disfluency> not anybody out there </disfluency> not very many people out there  / 
it 's a lot more fun when you 're not fighting a crowd  / 
 
yeah I think 0 it 's fun / 
I like just looking at the billboards / 
 
yeah / 
but sometimes <disfluency> when I </disfluency> if you go out there during the day you just fry under the sun / 
 
yeah it 's nice at night / 
 
yeah / 
 
that 's when I 've been  / 
 
it is *?* / 
 
<disfluency> and </disfluency> and do you know anything about that new stadium / 
have you seen all those pictures that they 're going  to put  out there / 
 
well no / 
 
yeah <disfluency> that </disfluency> <disfluency> that huge </disfluency> it 's suppose  to be a huge stadium / 
and it 's going  to have little shopping centers in it and little like a lake or something running through it / 
and uh they 're going  to try  to make it a real community center out there / 
 
and you 're going  to be able  to buy your -/ 
what was -/ 
no  wait / 
 
of course / 
 
what was it  about the liquor / 
 
<disfluency> that 's </disfluency> that 's in uh Texas stadium where the football players play  / 
 
was that -/ 
 
oh yeah / 
see you just -/ 
 
and they 're never going  to let liquor in there / 
 
well they 're trying / 
 
I know / 
but they try every year / 
and every year they get thrown out / 
it 's so stupid because they let you take it in there / 
but <disfluency> they do n't </disfluency> they <disfluency> do n't allow you to sell it </disfluency> do n't allow them to sell it there / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
but uh that new stadium 's going  to be real nice / 
and I heard <disfluency> that there 's </disfluency> uh that you can bid on that stadium / 
last night on the news I heard 0 they said 0 <disfluency> you could </disfluency> you could bid on the stadium  to have it named  after you / 
 
kind of right / 
 
<disfluency> it 's going  to </disfluency> it 's going  to go to the highest bidder / 
 
oh / 
 
well that 's the way 0  to do it  / 
 
so -/ 
yeah / 
so that could be your you know fifteen minutes of fame / 
 
you hear that / 
that 's my kids turning on their music / 
 let me see / 
Holly  turn it down / 
 
oh / 
 
I think 0 it 's the Bartman the Simpsons / 
 
oh God I stay away from them / 
 
I wish 0 I could *?* / 
 
I bet 0 you do *?* / 
 
and you get tired of that / 
 
yeah / 
that 's typical bureaucracy though / 
<disfluency> that 's </disfluency> <disfluency> that 's </disfluency> I think 0 it 's going  to be any where 0 you go  / 
it 's just worse in the bigger cities than it is *?* in the smaller ones / 
I do n't know / 
sometimes the smaller ones are just as bad / 
 
yeah / 
well but they ca n't be *?* though / 
they do n't have as much money / 
 
yeah / 
but <disfluency> the politics </disfluency> the politics gets worse in the small towns sometimes / 
 
most the time / 
oh man / 
but in Dallas you do n't even know who  's <disfluency> in </disfluency> in administration / 
there 's so many of them / 
 
you do n't even know who  to pay off  huh / 
 
I mean somebody walks in the classroom / 
and you do n't know what they 're there for  you know when they 're coming  how long they 're going  to be  / 
 
yeah / 
oh how funny / 
 
you know it 's just them / 
there they are  / 
and they 're writing the whole time / 
 
no communication whatsoever / 
 
no / 
I had them walk out of my class and not say their name anything / 
and I finally got to where I go okay I 'm Debbie Moore you know may I ask who you are  and what you are in my classroom for   you know because you know you never know where they 're going  what they 'll report  or -/ 
 
yeah / 
I know / 
 
and they 'll tell you 0 they 've written something down / 
and you --  <disfluency> and you have n't </disfluency> <disfluency> you </disfluency> and you never see it /  -- hope 0 they 're telling you / 
 
no huh-uh / 
 
that 's got  to be frustrating / 
 
oh it is *?* / 
 
how long have you <disfluency> taught </disfluency> taught Dallas schools  / 
 
uh this is my eleventh year / 
 
ooh that 's about uh ten too many / 
 
no actually it 's -/ 
now my job 's good much better than a lot -/ 
 
yeah / 
uh-huh / 
 
because I 'm Chapter One and all 0 I do  is  teach reading all day long / 
 
yeah / 
oh / 
 
and it 's just ten children at a time / 
 
well that 's not bad / 
 
no it 's good / 
and you 've got a lot of federal money too / 
 
but has n't it changed a lot over the years / 
 
teaching / 
oh yes / 
 
yeah / 
or  working in the system / 
 
yes / 
when I first started  teaching  I remember 0  I went up to my job and I said okay I want  to see a curriculum guide you know so I 'll know what I 'm suppose  to teach  / 
and they go we do n't have one of -/ 
we do n't even know where one is  / 
 
oh God / 
 
and I go okay / 
I mean <disfluency> you just </disfluency> you did what you wanted  to do  / 
 
oh how funny / 
 
and now they tell you what  to teach  and how long and you know what day --  yeah <disfluency> you do n't know which  is </disfluency> you do n't know which  is worse /  -- what period / 
yeah / 
no I know which  is worse / 
 
yeah I guess / 
so -/ 
yeah  being told  what  to do  is worse / 
 
um-hum / 
 
so how long are we suppose  to talk for  / 
 
well you can talk for ten minutes / 
but you do n't have  to *?* / 
 
oh you can *?* / 
 
yeah and no / 
if you talk to ten then they come <disfluency> over </disfluency> on and say oh you 've extended your limit and please  say good-bye within the next five seconds / 
 
oh I have n't ever talked that long / 
 
well you know I had n't *?* either till last night 0 I was talking to this retired administrator from Cleveland Ohio  / 
we started  talking about gangs you know / 
 
oh how funny / 
he lives in Cleveland / 
 
yeah / 
 
wow / 
 
and everybody else that I 've talked to  has been right around here / 
 
yeah / 
 
but she was real interesting / 
 
huh / 
 
and then tonight this woman called / 
have you taken any incoming calls / 
 
<disfluency> the </disfluency> yours is my second one / 
 
okay / 
so hers was the first one 0 I <disfluency> got </disfluency> gotten  
and uh -/ 
oh she was telling me all her problems / 
 
and it went over ten minutes / 
 
<disfluency> did she </disfluency> <disfluency> did she </disfluency> did you all not talk about the topic at all / 
 
well yeah we did *?* / 
but the topic was boring I thought 0  / 
what would you serve  uh if you were having a dinner party / 
 
oh / 
oh gosh / 
 
what was -/ 
I 'm trying  to remember / 
oh <disfluency> the other </disfluency> the one 0 I talked about  the other night was good / 
it was um about movies you know <disfluency> who </disfluency> what have you seen  at the movies lately and stuff like that / 
 
oh yeah / 
I could go on and on about that / 
 
me too because we go all the time / 
the guy 0 I was talking to  never goes / 
he was boy it sounds like you 're really up on this / 
and I said I see at least two a week / 
so --  ooh neat /  -- that  was real good  to talk about that / 
have you seen like uh Silence Of The Lambs / 
 
no / 
 
you 've got  to go  see that / 
 
the last one 0 I saw  was Dances <disfluency> Of The </disfluency> <disfluency> With The Wolves </disfluency> Of The Wolves / 
 
yeah we talked about that one too / 
and <disfluency> he </disfluency> he said 0 he did n't think 0 it should 've gotten all those awards / 
he thought 0 it was too long / 
but -/ 
 
oh I enjoyed it / 
I mean it was just more for my money / 
 
<disfluency> I </disfluency> I did *?* too / 
yeah / 
I did n't think 0 it was too long at all / 
um he said 0 after about the first hour he started  looking at his watch / 
 
huh / 
 
the other one 0 you need  to go  see  is  Sleeping With The Enemy / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
and how old are your kids  / 
 
one is eight / 
and one is eleven / 
 
you probably do n't want  to take them  to see Silence Of The Lambs / 
<disfluency> it 's </disfluency> <disfluency> it 's not </disfluency> it 's not too cool for kids / 
 
they usually pick their own / 
 
I bet 0 they do *?* / 
 
you know they 've got it all figured  out / 
 
yeah / 
they want  to see all the horror movies / 
 
well and Ninja Turtles / 
 
yeah / 
Ninja Turtles / 
 got  to have those / 
 
but most of the time really we watch them on the video / 
do n't you *?* / 
just massive rental / 
 
oh yeah / 
you bring -/ 
<disfluency> that 's </disfluency> well heck that 's a lot cheaper than uh  taking them out to the show --   going to -/ I know /  -- especially if you get them for a couple of nights / 
you do n't have  to watch them all at <disfluency> one night </disfluency> one time / 
 
that 's what we do  especially when it 's bad weather man  / 
 just --  yeah /  -- plug it in / 
 
of course you have  to get there early if you want  to get anything --  I know /  -- decent / 
well / 
 
it 's good when you go to Tom Thumb though and they 're cheap and nobody 's got them yet  / 
unbelievable / 
 
that 's true/ 
that 's true / 
we saw um Heroes Has Always Been Cowboys tonight / 
 
uh-huh / 
 
it was okay / 
it was kind of slow / 
and I felt like it kind of got chopped off at the end you know / 
<disfluency> it just </disfluency> it -/ 
and I do n't know / 
it one of those movies / 
it 's not going  to be around long / 
it 'll be a dollar movie in no time / 
 
do you read / 
 
not very much no / 
 
no / 
 
I do n't have the patience  to read/ / 
 
see I do that  to make myself go to sleep at night / 
 
yeah / 
oh my mom and dad read all the time / 
 
you saw Field Of the Dreams  right a long time ago / 
 
yeah  sure did *?* / 
 
so I was reading the book / 
and it 's called   Shoeless Joe / 
 
oh really / 
 never even heard that there was a book tied * in with that movie / 
 
um-hum / 
 
that 's interesting / 
 
so -/ 
 
that was a good movie too / 
 
well do you think 0 we 've covered baseball / 
 
I think so / 
 
okay / 

Red Pants 
While writers whose business it  is   to be witty often fail  to produce , grave authors occasionally are mirthful when laughter is farthest from their minds  . 
From a lifetime of undisciplined reading with innocent pencil in hand and malice prepense in mind , I have gleaned a harvest of what I am pleased  to denominate   Red Pants items , a sampling of which  follows . 
My designation derives from a splash of vivid writing in Francis Thompson 's Corymbus for Autumn in which he proclaims how “ day 's dying dragon ” was Panting red pants into the West   . 
In this trousers category , Thompson must share the limelight with Coleridge by virtue of the line in Kubla Khan : As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing . 
Even Shelley may stake a claim , if only in the pajama division of this sector , thanks to his description in Epipsychidion of how ... the slow , silent night Is measured  by the pants of their calm sleep  . 
Since everthing is  to be found  in Shakespeare , it  is not surprising that on at least two occasions the Board has contributed his own Red Pants nuggets . 
In Antony and Cleopatra  Act , Scene , lines 14 et seq.  Antony commands the wounded Scarus  to ... leap thou , attire and all , Through proof of harness to my heart , and there Ride on the pants  triumphing . 
And in Othello  Act , Scene I , line 80  Cassio utters the fervent prayer that Othello might Make love 's quick pants in Desdemona 's arms . 
variation on this theme occurs in Alba de Céspedes ' The Secret  translated * from the Italian by Isabel Quigly : Simon and Schuster , New York , 1958 , page 114  where she confides that “ I still had a whole afternoon  before me 0  to spend  , and I used it  to tidy up my drawers  .... ” 
One may well wonder what Miss Stowe had  in mind when , in Uncle Tom 's Cabin  Chapter 5  , she narrates how “ Mrs. Shelby stood like one stricken    . 
Finally ,  turning to her toilet , she rested her face in her hands , and gave a sort of groan . ” 
In this same vein , the mirthless Milton adds his bit to the general hilarity of nations when , in  describing Mount Etna in Book I of Paradise Lost *  lines 236-7  he penned And  leave a singed bottom all involved With stench and smoke  :  
And in Chapter of Vanity Fair , when Blenkinsop , the housekeeper , sought  to console Amelia for Joe Sedley 's jilting of her dear Rebecca  , Thackeray confides  indelicately , ?  that Amelia wept confidentially on the housekeeper 's shoulder “ and relieved herself a good deal . ” 
Chuckles often emanate from the British employment of a term in a sense at variance with American usage . 
There is that oft-quoted example , near the opening of Trial by Jury , where Defendant asks , “ Is this the Court of the Exchequer  ? ” 
and  having been assured  that it was *?* , Defendant  aside  commands himself  to “ Be firm , be firm , my pecker . ” 
The British , of course , do not giggle at this bit of Gilbertian dialogue , since to them pecker means ` courage , ' as in the phrase “  to keep your pecker up . ” 
Two of the more common examples of British-American divergence of usage are  screw and  knock up . 
In Vanity Fair  Chapter 39  , the niggardly Sir Pitt was not nearly the aerial acrobat 0 your American sophomore might fancy him to be  when he “ screwed his tenants by letter  . ” 
He was simply making extortionate exactions upon his wretched lessees . 
Similarly , when in Chapter of the same novel , Mrs. Bute reminds her husband that “ You 'd have been screwed  in goal , Bute , if I had not kept your money  , ” she was not speaking of pleasures deferred * . 
In Bleak House  Chapter  Grandfather Smallweed ,  referring to Mr. George , warns Mr. Tulkinghorn that “ I have him periodically in a vice . 
I 'll twist him , sir . 
I 'll screw him , sir . ” 
In Kipling 's The Light That  Failed  Chapter  , Torpenhow urges Dick  to attend a party that night , “ We shall be half screwed  before the morning , ” is  his dismal sales pitch to Dick . 
In Chapter of Vanity Fair , Thackeray reports on Joe Sedley 's drunken avowal  to wed Becky Sharp the next morning , even if he had  to “ knock up the Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth , ” in order  to have him in readiness  to perform the ceremony . 
In Great Expectations  Chapter  , we learn how “ ...
Mr. Whopsle ,  being knocked  up , was in such a very bad temper  . ” 
And who could  blame him ? 
Many a raucous snigger has been sniggered  from the pure-minded use of a word that  suggests unmentionable parts of the human body . 
It  does not take a too-wicked mind  to read into such terms meanings of a lewd nature . 
Who can  , for instance , blame a youth with but a mildly evil disposition from  guffawing when he reads in Pater 's Marius The Epicurean  Chapter  a reference to Apuleius ' The Golden Ass noting that “ all through the book , there is an unmistakably real feeling for asses  ... ” ? 
In Scott 's The Bride of Lammermoor  Chapter  , one reads about a boy “ cudgelling an ass , ” and one goes back over the passage  to reassure himself that it does not contain a typographical error for “ cuddling . ” 
One may be indulged  a giggle even though he is sure that Isak Dinesen did not intend an impropriety when she recorded in Out of Africa  Part , Chapter 4  how “ Fathima 's big white cock came  strutting up before me   . ” 
And one is certain that Kenneth Rexroth , in his American Poetry in the Twentieth Century  Herder and Herder ,  , 1971  did not intend  to hint at closet biographical matter when , in Chapter I , he wrote that “ Whitman 's poems are full of men doing things together  , ” or , later in the same chapter , when he referred to “ Whitman 's joyous workmen swinging their tools in the open air  . ” 
College freshman still read with flendish glee the first line in Canto I of Spenser 's The Faerie Queene  and never  mind the title , !  that  tells how Gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine  . 
In his poem Mr Nixon  from Hugh Selwyn Mauberley  , Ezra Pound 's Mr. Nixon advises kindly  Do n't kick against the pricks , although the identities of the latter are not divulged  . 
One is entitled   to speculate on what outrageous proposal the narrator had made  in Proust 's Remembrance of Things Past , Vol. 2 : — Cities of the Plain  translated * by Scott Moncrieff : — Modern Library  ,  , 1934 , Page 90   to cause the Duchess to say , “ Apart from your balls , ca n't I be of any use to you ? ” 
There is a famous letter penned * by Rupert Brooke to his friend , Edward Marsh , from somewhere near Fiji  p. 463 of Treasury of the World 's Great Letters , Simon and Schuster ,  , 1940  in which he relates how he sends his native boy up a palm tree , where he “ cuts off a couple of vast nuts    ... ” 
 macho victim not disclosed   . 
In the first chapter of Uncle Tom 's Cabin , Miss Stowe offers a dialogue between Haley and Mr. Shelby , part of which  goes , “ ` Well , ' said Haley , after they had both silently picked their nuts for a season , ` what do you say  ? ' ” 
In Bleak House  Chapter  Dickens may cause some readers to blush when he wrote of Mr. George 's blush that “ He reddened a little through his brown  . ” 
We must move ineluctably to a consideration of perfectly reputable words which ,   having acquired sexual connotations , cause adolescent : — and often adult : — hilarity , even when  read  by a person of only mildly prurient mind  . 
In Forster 's Passage to India  Chapter  a vivid picture is created  by the sentence “ Tangles like this still interrupted their intercourse . ” 
Pages later  Chapter  , it  is acknowledged  that “ He , too , felt that this was their last free intercourse . ” 
Apparently from then on , it was going  to have  to be cash or credit card only . 
In The Bride of Lammermoor  Chapter  , we are informed  that the heroine “ placed certain restrictions on their intercourse , ” a limitation that  might have been more usefully set  in that same author 's Rob Roy  Chapter  where we are told  of the chance that the narrator and Miss Vernon might be “ thrown  into very close and frequent intercourse  . ” 
variation of this theme  is found  in Robert Browning 's The Flight of the Duchess  Section  : : — Not he , ! For in Paris they told the elf 0 Our rough North land was the Land of Lays , even though it  is generally acknowledged  that Paris is número uno in this area of human activity . 
More picturesque are  the references to erections . 
An arresting one occurs in Passage to India  Chapter  in which Forster describes a small building as “ a flimsy and frivolous erection  , ” while in The Mayor of Casterbridge  Chapter  the Mayor himself “ beheld the unattractive exterior of Farfrae 's erection . ” 
phrase can paint an astonishing picture for the reader . 
 Consider Dickens ' sharp image in Bleak House  Chapter  when he describes how “ Sir Leicester leans back in his chair , and breathlessly ejaculates   .... ” 
Or , in Nicholas Nickleby  Chapter  where that admirable novelist graphically portrays how old Arthur Gride “ again raised his hands , again chuckled , and again ejaculated   . ” 
And in his short tale , Lionizing , Edgar Allan Poe is quite candid in  describing the reaction of one of his characters : 
“ ` Admirable , ! ' he ejaculated  ,  thrown  quite off his guard by the beauty of the manoeuvre . ” 
Alas for perfectly lovely words that  acquire pejorative meanings over the years  
Earlier in this century , pansy became a derogatory epithet  to describe an effete male ,  thereby cheapening forever lines like Shelley 's noble image in Adonais  verse  : His head was bound  with pansies over-blown , not to mention Poe 's odd allusion in For Annie : With rue and the beautiful Puritan pansies . 
Or , more slap-stickish , Benson 's action picture in Lucia in London  Chapter 8  : “ Georgie stepped on a beautiful pansy . ” 
Of more recent vintage is  gay . 
Nobody used  to snicker at Chaucer 's line  No. 5818  in The Prologe of the Wyf of Bathe , in which that harried dame asks : Why is my neghebores wif so gay   ? 
In his poem The Menagerie , one of William Vaughan Moody 's characters advises : If nature made you so graceful ,  do n't get gay , while in Othello  ah , the Bard again , !  in his dialogue with Desdemona and Emilia on the praise of women , Iago refers to the kind that  Never lack'd gold , and yet went never  gay . 
 Act , Scene I , line 150  
And what in the world is one  to make  of William Butler Yeats 's startling revelation  in his poem Lapis Lazuli  from Last Poems  that They know that Hamlet and Lear are gay ? 
Indeed it  is an amusing , albeit utterly wasteful pastime  to pursue the quest for Red Pants examples . 
May good cess befall all such quixotically misguided readers  
One caveat :  never assume blithely that an odd word or suspicious phrase is as lubricious as it sounds *?* . 
In The Bride of Lammermoor  Chapter  Bucklaw vows , “ I will chop them off with my whinger , ” and one feels  quite let  down when he learns that a whinger is but a whinyard , which  is merely a short sword  . 
“  Turning a corner of the Mazza Gallerie into a women 's tennis store , I was startled   to see ... hordes of giggling high school girls ... ” 
 From an article by Dorothy Gilliam in the Washington Post , . 
 Submitted  by .  
 
If you are a fan of old-fashioned jazz : — what  is now known  as “ traditional ” or “ trad ” jazz : — you are familiar with one of the standard “ jump tunes ” of the genre : — a tune most commonly called *  Muskrat Ramble . 
Even if you are not a fan , you must have heard it as least a dozen times . 
It is the one that  goes , “ Dah , ! Dah , ! Dah , ! Dah , ! da-dat-dat-dah , ! Da-de-da-de-da-de-dat-dat-dah , ! da-de-da-de-da-de-dat-dat-dah  ” 
That 's it ; sure ; you 've heard it . 
I think 0 I first bought a recording of Muskrat Ramble back in about 1940 , when I was in my early teens  . 
My memory is rickety , but I am sure 0 my first recording was labeled    , and I think , though I am less sure , that it was played  by the late “ Muggsy ” Spanier , who  was , to my mind , one of the greatest of jazz trumpeters . 
Later , I got another recording of the same tune , this one by , I think , Mezz Mezzrow . 
The label said ,  . 
I thought 0 that was surely the first time 0 I had ever seen such an obvious typographical error in , of all things , a simple title on a simple 78 - rpm record  . 
 This ,  remember , was in my youth , and it was a time when typographical errors were called   typographical errors , not typos : — at least by kids in junior high  .  
Some time later , I got still another version of  , with still another version of the title . 
This time , it was  . 
That , I thought , was really absurd . 
Not only had they left out the “ ” ; they 'd changed the “ ” to “  ” . 
Now , it made no sense at all . 
On the other hand , I reasoned , if there were , in fact , some sort of cat called *  a muscat , perhaps it was n't so outrageous . 
I looked up muscat in my Webster 's and found that it is a ` variety of grape . ' 
 To name a ramble after a variety of grape seemed to me  preposterous . 
I was young and , by today 's standards , at least , pathetically innocent . 
During my time in senior high , and , after that , in the Army Air Force , I had other things on my mind  there was a war on , after all  and I did n't give the : - : -  problem any thought . 
 Speaking of my time in the , which  was utterly undistinguished , I think 0 I must make a confession . 
Now might be as good a time as any 0  to reveal a theft 0 I committed  at an Air Force Base near Seymour , Indiana  . 
It was winter and bitterly cold . 
The wind used  to sweep across that damned airfield with what  seemed  an absolute determination  to crystallize our bodies . 
One day when the wind chill factor was nearing absolute zero  , I took shelter in the service club . 
There was the omnipresent phonograph , or Vic , short for Victrola , and the stack of records next to it . 
In those days , people as a rule did not take much care of phonograph records . 
Usually the records were taken  from their jackets and loaded   naked in stacks , where they picked up dust , scratched one another , and traded static electricity  . 
I was shuffling through a stack of about fifty records , and I came across three Bessie Smiths . 
I played all three , and the few other G.I.s in the room , which  was quite large : — big enough for a fair-sized dance with a small orchestra : — either paid no attention or asked me  to put on something by Glenn Miller or Jimmy or Tommy Dorsey instead . 
Among Bessie 's numbers were  Dying Gambler 's Blues , Sing Sing Prison Blues , and one 0 I had never heard  called *  Black Mountain Blues , which  has the imcomparable lines , Home in Black Mountain a chile' will smack yo' face ; Home in Black Mountain a chile' will smack yo' face ; Babies cry for liquor an' all the birds sing bass . and  Goin' back to Black Mountain , me an' my razor an' my gun ;  Goin' back to Black Mountain , me an' my razor an my gun ;  Goin'  cut him if he stan' still ,  goin'  shoot him if he run . 
I was  , and still am  , captivated by “ Babies cry for liquor an' the birds sing bass , ” and in the arrogance of my youth , I was certain that nobody else on the airfield either knew or cared who Bessie Smith was  , nor would any other be enchanted  by basso birds , so I turned thief . 
I ca n't remember how I did it  , but somehow I smuggled those records back to my barracks and got them home  intact on my next furlough . 
I kept them  in good shape until my last 78 - rpm turntable died . 
End of digression and back to  : 
Muskrat Ramble is credited  to Edward “ Kid ” Ory and Ray Gilbert . 
“ Kid ” Ory played great jazz trombone . 
The only thing 0 I know  about Gilbert is that I find him listed  as co-author of Muskrat Ramble . 
About thirty years ago , when I was concocting an epicurean dish and saw that I had no sherry on hand  , I went to the liquor store and bought a bottle of muscatel that  was being sold  for an absurdly low price and that I thought 0  might be exactly right for my sauce . 
It was n't bad , The wine jogged my thoughts back to Muscat Ramble . 
Muscatel is made  from muscat grapes , is sometimes called   muscat , and ,  being relatively cheap and sweet and high in alcohol content , is the booze of choice for a great many wines . 
An old college friend of mine who  celebrated his twentieth birthday : — meaning twenty years of sobriety : — a couple of years ago , tells me that when he was on the skids and riding the rails from drunk tank to drunk tank  , the favorite terms for muscat were muscadoodle and Napa Valley smoke . 
I made up my mind that Muscat Ramble was almost certainly the original name of the tune . 
My reasoning is that it  is not likely that “ Kid ” Ory or Ray Gilbert had ever seen a muskrat , and it  's even less likely that they or anyone else has ever seen a muskrat doing anything that we would be likely  to think of  as  rambling . 
Muskrats , according to my encyclopedia , look like giant rats , are found  in and around the mudbanks bordering marshes and quiet ponds , have partially webbed feet , and do a good deal of swimming . 
They do not appear  to do much rambling . 
Muscat , or muscatel , on the other hand , is found  on skid rows all over the land . 
guy with a bottle-shaped brown paper bag , damp and wrinkled at its upper end , has almost certainly been slugging down a sweet wine of high proof , and the odds  are pretty good 0 you would find 0 it is a muscadoodle . 
After the guy finishes his Napa Valley smoke and has slept it off , he is looking for the means  to get another muscat fix . 
Now he is on a ramble with his hand out and a pleading look in his roadmapped eyes . 
I suspect that that is precisely the song 's origin . 
My theory is that the “ r ” got put  in there simply because muskrat is a more common word than muscat . 
It is the same reason 0 most of us , I assume , have heard , “ He 's in the hospital  with prostrate trouble  . ” 
Prostrate is a more common word that prostate , so prostrate is what we get  . 
The “ r ” fits in naturally . 
I got a strange sort of corroboration from my good friend Rosy McHargue , who  is now pushing eighty-seven years and has spent most of his life  playing clarinet and sax with some of the best jazzbands : — Benny Goodman , Red Nichols , Ted Weems , and a slew of others . 
Rosy , too , had seen the tune as Muskrat , Muskat , and Muscat . 
I asked him what he thought 0 the original title was  . 
He had known “ Kid ” Ory well , and he said , “ You know , Tom , I 'm not exactly sure . 
I once asked Ory about it and he said , ` It 's m-u-s-c-a-t . 
Muskrat . ' 
so I think 0 that 's just the way 0 everyone said muscat  . ” 
There you are . 
I find a muskrat ramble difficult 0  to imagine  visually . 
I picture muskrats wallowing about in the mire and paddling sluggishly through the water , but I would n't call that  rambling . 
On the other hand , a wino with an empty paper bag on a ramble  to maintain his muscat level : — now that has a touch of poetry . 
Maybe not in the same class with “ all the birds sing bass , ” but poetry , nevertheless . 
As a nonexpert , although interested , subscriber to  , it  is “ a bit mysterious ” to me that the singular noun absence takes the plural verb are . 
I refer to the first sentence of your article about the Longman Dictionary  , 1  . 
Helen Power , in “ Women on Language ; Women in Language , ”  , 2  may bewail the insensitivity of the male . 
But she betrays her own elitist insensitivity when she describes a flight attendant as “ the person who  passes peanuts on an airplane  . ” 
I hope 0 Ms. / Miss / Mrs. Power never needs  to draw on the considerable first-aid and emergency training that every attendant must master  . 
Antipodean Newsletter 
Leonard Bloomfield ,  having begun with a theory of meaning which  emphasized the environment in which objects were present and named   , had  to add the obvious proviso that we sometimes mention what  is not present . 
I have lately been reading accounts of the exploration of the western and northwestern deserts of Australia in the 1870s and I have become very aware of the effect 0 absent necessities might have  on the frequency of particular items in discourse . 
In the desert the missing necessity is water . 
As the explorer Ernest Giles put it , the explorer 's experience is a “ baptism worse than that of fire : — the baptism of no water . ” 
My impression was that in the journals of desert explorers the word water , alone or in compounds , and words relating to water , were unusually frequent . 
It  is , I suppose , likely that people with little money must think of money more than the well-off do *?* and that the hungry will dwell on thoughts of food and the thirsty on drink . 
Here was a chance  to quantify such things . 
I decided  to make a count of words relating to water in reports of desert exploration . 
 Taking quite at random a single page  page 7  in the journals of the Gregory brothers recording an early  1846  exploration of country east and north of Perth , I find the word water used  fifteen times . 
Ten pages on  page 17  water occurs nine times but there are also the related words stream  twice  well  twice  pool , channel , and the circumlocution “ essential element . ” 
Two words , dew and shower , refer in the context to the presence of water ; the rest are in contexts indicating its absence . 
I tried another explorer , Ernest Giles . 
 Taking page 17 again , I was reminded  that Giles is rather given to semi-serious poetic diction at times , and we find him referring to the presence of water in the Finke River as “ the stream purling over its stony floor ” or , quoting some bygone poet , “ brightly the brook through the green leaflets ,  giddy with joyousness , dances along . ” 
Perhaps present water called for some stylistic celebration . 
Two hundred pages further on there is less exuberance in the circumlocution “ that fluid so terribly scarce in the region , ” and in three other references water is simply water . 
Giles is not always waxing  poetic and may , like other explorers , be useful as a source for the history of Australian and general English . 
His use of the word tank 0  to refer to a hollowed-out reservoir  “ Gibson dug a small tank and the water soon cleared ”  antedates the , for instance . 
Since this linguistic-statistical study of an obsession might well prove  to be an important contribution to psycholinguistics , I decided  to make a larger sample of watery words ,  choosing the straightforward journals of Colonel Peter Egerton Warburton , who  led an expedition across the western interior of Australia in 1873-4 . 
In a randomly chosen sequence of ten pages  151-60 of the published journal  there were twenty-eight occurrences of the word water  eight of them in compounds  no page being without at least one example . 
In addition , there was a rich collection of words relating to water ,  not necessarily indicating its presence . 
“  Hoping  to find a lake ” is included  , though of course it does n't indicate the presence of water . 
Even words which  are usually of more general reference are brought  into relation with water in a text like this . 
Gum-trees or rocks  in areas of sand  appear as signs of possible water . 
Apart from these words and lake , words and phrases directly associated * with thoughts of water and reinforcing the sense of obsession include pool , springs , drainage hole , clay hole , flood , channel , water-courses , water-hole , rock-hole , drink , drinkable , running water , stream , and native well . 
The last two items merit comment . 
Stream is often said  not to be used  in Australia except in metaphorical ways ,  normally being replaced  by creek . 
Warburton 's use : “ sandbanks intercept the stream , which  finally splits into narow water-courses and spreads itself over the plains , and so it ends as a creek ” suggests a somewhat more complex relation between the two words . 
British-born explorers did not set out  to write Australian English , of course . 
Gregory uses stream in the way normal in England ; Giles consistently refers to gens in the hills of central Australia , though glen is not current   outside place-names  in contemporary Australian English . 
The other name , native well is , as a later explorer David Carnegie , author of Spinifex and Sand  1898  points out *?* , a misnomer . 
He believes 0 native wells are essentially rock-holes  depressions in rock  buried * in fairly shallow sand , which  , when  hollowed  out by the natives  , appear  to be wells . 
This sort of misnomer leads Carnegie  to suppose that “ to the uninitiated no map is so misleading as that of West Australia where lakes are salt-bogs without surface water , springs seldom run , and native ` wells ' are merely tiny holes in the rock , yielding from 0 to 200 gallons  . ” 
Carnegie also describes namma-holes and soaks as sources of water . 
Soaks are shallow wells sunk * near the base of an outcrop  to tap an underground reservoir . 
Namma-holes have been variously described  ; to Carnegie they are depressions on the surface of rocks , often with a rounded bottom , where stones are often found  ,  suggesting that the stones have something 0  to do  with the formation of the holes  . 
Some nostalgic early Australians deplored the loss in our speech of English country words , the glens and streams  alive , anyway , in the journals of explorers  coppices and brooks , woods , becks , and rivulets . 
Perhaps these words did not really fit . 
We might have done better with Arabic - speaking settlers . 
Wadi , for instance , would describe an inland creek rather well . 
Be that as it may *?* , a later Australian visitor to English drizzle might feel nostalgic when  thinking of the parched and thirsty but water - obsessed vocabulary developed * in the drier areas of our sunburnt land  . 
Favorite Grammatical Game : Puzzling Pronouns 
Here is a game just made *  to while away the hours on a commuter train  with your favorite author , a perfect place 0  to hunt for Puzzling Pronouns  . 
Fowler lists five instances where a careless writer can go wrong  . 
There is really no excuse , Fowler says  not he says , !  but here we give examples of his third case only , where “ there should not be two parties justifying even a momentary doubt about which the pronoun represents   . ” 
And here the deluge of printed matter abounds with such specimens that one would suppose them to be the rule rather than the exceptions . 
It is a game that  is like  fishing in a barrel , but more stimulating mentally . 
I am not picking on the following authors ; it is just a random catch . 
In Thomas Hardy 's The Hand of Ethelberta , it  is suggested  by Ethelberta that she and some others go  to see Milton 's tomb in Cripplegate church . 
Her suitor , Neigh , who  had proposed marriage in a previous chapter , appears  somewhat apprehensive at Ethelberta 's suggestion . 
This apprehension is observed  by a Mr. Belmaine and mistaken  by him for an indication that Neigh has been dragged  into  going to the church against his will “ by his over-hasty wife . ” 
One wonders whether the marriage had secretly taken place between the consecutive chapters  
You see , it is Belmaine 's wife who  was doing the dragging . 
Somerset Maugham was a good and careful grammarian but now and then he slipped . 
In The Letter , a solicitor , Mr. Joyce , is approached  by a Mr. Crosbie : He spoke beautiful English ,  accenting each word with precision , and Mr. Joyce had often wondered at the extent of his vocabulary .... 
Sometimes I wonder about the extent of my own vocabulary , too , but really , not when I 'm interviewing a client  . 
From The Once and Future King , by White : Naturally it was Lancelot who  rescued her . 
Sir Boss had managed  to find him at the abbey , during his two days ' absence , and now he came back in the nick of time  to fight Sir Mador for the queen . 
Nobody who  knew him would have expected him to do anything else , whether he had been sent  away in disgrace or not : — but , as it  was thought  0 he had left the country , his return did have a dramatic quality . 
 Not to say a quality of confusion : — pronoun-cedly so . 
From Oh What a Paradise it Seems   , by John Cheever : The size of Chisholm 's teeth , the thickness of his glasses , his stoop and the spring with which he walked  all marked him , Sears thought , as a single-minded reformer . 
His marriage , Sears guessed , would have been unsuccessful and his children would have difficulty  finding themselves . 
No wonder : — we 've lost them already . 
Mark Twain poses us a little mystery in Pudd'nhead Wilson : which knife  does the killing ? 
Quiet now . 
Lights , action : I was asleep , but Luigi was awake , and he thought 0 he detected a vague form nearing the bed . 
He slipped the knife out of the sheath and was ready , and unembarrassed by hampering bedclothes , for the weather was hot and we had n't any . 
Suddenly that native rose at the bedside , and bent over me with his right hand lifted  and a dirk in it aimed  at my throat ; but Luigi grabbed his wrist , pulled him downward , and drove his own knife into the man 's neck . 
That is the whole story . 
Well , was it Luigi 's knife or the native 's ? 
If we had only that scene 0  to go by  we would never really know , and all because of a Puzzling Pronoun : — or two  
Oh , it can lead one to a rhymed couplet : He loves his brother and his wife , Does he live a double life ? 
 Give me my grammatical games any day to a crossword puzzle . 
The Joys and Oys of Yiddish 
Rabbi Robert Schenkerman Temple Beth Jacob 
When Isaac Bashevis Singer was awarded  the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1978  , he remarked in his acceptance speech : The high honor bestowed * upon me is also a recognition of the Yiddish language : — a language of exile , without a land , without frontiers , not supported * by any government , a language which  possesses no words for weapons , ammunition , military exercises , war tactics . 
There is a quiet humor in Yiddish and a gratitude for every day of life , every crumb of success , each encounter of love . 
In a figurative way , Yiddish is the wise and humble language of us all , the idiom of a frightened and hopeful humanity . 
The word Yiddish derives from the German judisch ` Jewish . ' 
The principal parent of Yiddish is High German , the form of German encountered * by Jewish settlers from northern France in the eleventh century . 
Yiddish is written  in the characters of the Hebrew alphabet and from right to left and enjoys  borrowing words from Russian , Polish , English , and all the other languages and countries along the routes that Jews have traveled  during the past thousand years . 
Journalist Charles Rappaport once quipped , “ I speak ten languages : — all of them Yiddish . ” 
Although Yiddish has been in danger of  dying out for hundreds of years , the language is spoken  today by millions of people throughout the world : — Russia , Poland , Rumania , France , England , Israel , Africa , Latin America , New Zealand , Australia , Canada , and the United States , where , like the bagel , it was leavened  on both coasts , in New York and Hollywood  . 
It is spoken  even in Transylvania : beautiful girl awakens in bed  to find a vampire at her side . 
Quickly she holds up a cross . 
“ Zie gernisht helfen , ” smiles  the vampire . 
Translation : “ It wo n't do you any good . ” 
Most of us already speak a fair amount of Yiddish  Yinglish  without  fully realizing it . 
Webster 's Third New International Dictionary lists about 500 Yiddish words that  have become part of our everyday conversations , including : cockamamy  or cockamamie  ` mixed-up , ridiculous , . ' fin slang for ` five - dollar bill , ' from finf , the Yiddish word for ` five , . ' gun moll a double clipping of gonif 's Molly , Yiddish for ` thief 's girl , . ' kibitzer ` one who  comments , often in the form of unwanted advice , during a game , often cards , . ' mavin ` expert , . ' mazuma ` money , . ' mish-mosh ` mess , . ' schlep  to ` drag or haul , . ' schlock ` shoddy , cheaply produced merchandise , . ' schmeer the ` entire deal , ' the ` whole package , . ' schnoz slang for ` nose , . ' yenta ` blabbermouth , gossip ; woman of low origins , . ' ... and so on through the whole megillah : ` long , involved story . ' 
number of poignant Yiddish words  defy genuine translation into English : chutzpa ` nerve ; unmitigated gall ; ' a quality 0 we admire  within ourselves , but never in others . 
In his delightful study , The Joys of Yiddish  McGraw-Hill 1968  Leo Rosten offers two classic definitions . 
“ Chutzpa is that quality enshrined * in a man , who ,   having killed his mother and father , throws himself on the mercy of the court because he is an orphan . 
chutzpanik may be defined  as the man who  shouts ` Help , ! Help , ! ' while  beating you up . ” 
mensch a ` real authentic human being : — a person . ' 
naches the ` glow of pleasure-plus-pride that only a child can give  to its parents ' : “ This is my son , the Doctor  ” 
oy not so much a word as an entire vocabulary , as Rosten observes *?* : “ can express any emotion , from trivial delight to the blackest woe . ” 
oy vay ; oy vay in mir literally , “ Oh , pain , ” but , in its long or short form , can be used  for anything from condolence to lament : 
On August 6 , 1945 , the world 's first nuclear weapon was dropped  on Hiroshima , Japan . 
Two hundred and eighty-two thousand human beings died and tens of thousands more were left   burned  , maimed  , and homeless . 
Albert Einstein , whose letter to Roosevelt  had initiated the American effort that  resulted in the atom bomb and whose special theory of relativity  formed its theoretical basis , heard the news on the radio . 
For a long time he could only find two Yiddish words traditionally used * by Jews in such circumstances : “ Oi vey . ” 
: — The Little , Brown Book of Anecdotes 
tsuris the gamut of painful emotions : — some real , some imagined , some self-inflicted . 
Yiddish is especially versatile in  describing those poor souls who  inhabit the world of the ineffectual , and each is assigned  a distinct place in the gallery of pathetic types : schmo , schmendrik , schnook , schmegegge , schlep , schlub , schmuck , putz , klutz , kvetch , and nudnik . 
Yiddish easily coins new names for new personalities : a nudnik is a ` pest ' ; a phudnik is a ` nudnik with a Ph. ' 
The rich nuances that  suffuse this roll call are seen  in the timeless distinction between a schlemiel ` clumsy jerk ' and a schlimazel ` habitual loser ' : the schlemiel inevitably trips and spills his hot soup : — all over the schlimazel . 
 And the nebbish is the one who  has  to clean it up .  
The Yiddish language , through its color , its target - accurate expressions , its raw idioms , and its sayings exudes a refreshing magic and laughter , mixed * with sober thought , that  has been handed  down from generation to generation and from nation to nation . 
Yiddish never apologizes for what  it is  : — the earthy , wise soul of an expressive people learning that life is but a mingled yarn , good and ill together . 
Which  reminds us of the zaftig ` buxom , well-rounded ' blonde who  wore an enormous diamond to a charity ball . 
“ It happens  to be the third most famous diamond in the whole world , ” she boasted  . 
“ The first is the Hope diamond , then comes the Kohinoor , and then comes this one , which  is called   the Lipschitz . ” 
“ What a stone  
How lucky you are   ” 
“  Wait ,  wait , ” said  the lady . 
“ Nothing in life is all mazel  ` good luck '  . 
Unfortunately , with this famous Lipschitz diamond comes also  the famous Lipschitz curse . ” 
The other women gasped and asked , “ And what is the famous Lipschitz curse  ? ” 
“ Lipschitz , ” sighed  the lady . 
The Women 's History of the Word 
Those who  are not familiar with feminist writings may find it  useful and interesting  to consider a book , recently published * in Britain , that  is typical of the harsher brand of such works . 
The work in question offers nothing regarding language , so its review here is ancillary to the main function of  . 
The feminist movement is very much alive in Britain , and the “ Greenham Common Women ” are probably largely responsible for much of the national sentiment against the Cruise missiles installed * at an American base near that village . 
In Britain , as elsewhere , most books by feminist writers are reviewed  by women , usually feminists . 
Men are seldom assigned   to review them , possibly because the editor fears that they will be either ignorant of  or unsympathetic to  the issues raised * , if not biased against them , or because the editor is a woman . 
Because  writing an unfavorable review of a bad feminist book would be tantamount to treachery , such books are often unjustifiably praised  , as  was the case with this work by Rosalind Miles , which  was well received  on its publication in June . 
According to the blurb on the dust jacket of this distinctly unpleasant book , Rosalind Miles is head of the Centre for Women 's Studies at Coventry Polytechnic , a lecturer , broadcaster , journalist , and author of several other books , including a “ highly acclaimed ” biography of Ben Jonson . 
One might like  to believe that this gives her the cachet of authoritative scholarship , but the text does not bear out the promise . 
For the most part , the book consists of a rewriting of history , from the dawn of time , with the purpose of  demonstrating two main themes : the “ fact ” that women were responsible for all the important contributions to the advancement of civilization  as the development of agriculture , for instance  often despite the arrogance and stupidity of men ; and the “ fact ” that women have long been subjected  to domination by men . 
Miles suggests that such domination is a recent phenomenon : — only a couple of thousand years old : — for she points to the clear superiority of women in primitive religions and matriarchies , right on through to the Egyptian dynastic rulers . 
At one point , she gets so carried away with her thesis that she suggests that females were responsible not only for all of human evolutionary biology but for the very notion of counting  in order  to keep track of menstruation  and , probably by the same token , astronomy . 
She quotes   and , presumably , accepts   another source which  holds that “ woman first awakened in humankind the capacity  to recognize abstracts . ” 
If you believe that balderdash , you 'll believe anything . 
In the good old days , we were taught  that the pyramids were built  by tens of thousands of slaves . 
Recent speculation has it that they were not slaves but : — what would one call them   , ? : — ordinary laborers . 
Here comes Miles ,  authoritatively quoting Diodorus , the Greek historian , who  recorded  60-30  that “ innocent women even swelled the ranks of pitiful slaves whose forced labour  built the pyramids : 
...  bound  in fetters , they work continually without  being allowed  any rest by night or day . 
They have not a rag 0  to cover their nakedness , and neither the weakness of age nor women 's infirmities are any plea  to excuse them , but they are driven  by blows until they drop  dead . ” 
p. 49 
As the pyramids were already about 2500 years old when Diodorus wrote his World History  , one is given  to wonder what his authority  might have been  for such a vivid description . 
It  is even less comprehensible how a modern researcher could accept it and have the effrontery  to promulgate it  . 
Miles 's book is riddled  with many similar distortions , convenient omissions , and generalizations : 
... Women have always commanded over half the sum total of human intelligence and creativity . 
From the poet Sappho , who  in the sixth century was the first 0  to use the lyric  to write subjectively and explore the range of female experience , to the Chinese polymath Pan Chao  Ban Zhao  who  flourished around 100 as historian , poet , astronomer , mathematician and educationalist , the range is startling . 
In every field , women too numerous 0 * to list  were involved  in  developing knowledge and contributing to the welfare of their societies as they did so : the Roman Fabiola established a hospital where she worked both as nurse and doctor ,  becoming the first known woman surgeon before she died in 399  . 
p. 52 
Earlier , on page 49 , we learnt about Agnodice , “ who  lived  to become the world 's first known woman gynaecologist , ” in the fourth century . 
Clearly , this rosily checkered past was soon  to be replaced  , chiefly , it seems , as Judeo-Christian-Islamic-Confucian-Buddhist cultures flourished . 
It was not too bad early on , when , according to Miles , the seven Maccabean martyrs who  “ saved Judaism ” did so only at the instigation of their mother  . 
Miles continues : In early Christianity likewise , women found not merely a role , but an instrument of resistance to male domination ; in  choosing  to be a bride of Christ they inevitably cocked a snook at lesser male fry . 
Thousands of young women helped  to build the church of God with their body , blood and bones when frenzied fathers , husbands or fiancés preferred  to see them die by fire , sword or the fangs of wild beasts rather than live  to flout sic the duty and destiny of womanhood  . 
p. 63 
But the situation soon deteriorated : Even St. Paul ,  later the unregenerate prophet of female inferiority , was forced   to acknowledge the help 0 he received  from Lydia , the seller of purple dyes in Philippi . 
ibid. 
This rewriting of history is punctuated  by an array of four - letter invectives applied * to males and by adjectives like brilliant , unusual , inspiring , and so forth to women . 
 Citing a Judaic law-book of the 16th century which  identified a woman for the days preceding , during , and following her period as niddah ` impure , ' Miles has the lack of taste  to write the following : . 
As a final stroke , in a grim foreshadowing of what the future held  in store for the Jews , the niddah had  to wear special clothing as a badge of her separate and despised status . 
p. 83 
Here and there in this morass of misunderstanding , Miles treads on solid ground if one can agree with the eminent anthropologist Joseph Campbell . 
Campbell ,  known  for his extensive analyses of the world 's mythologies , religions , and cultures , noted the marked bias against women emerging from Judaic concepts , later reinforced * by Christian and Islamic doctrine . 
Most of the religions of the world connected woman with mother earth , fertility , and all the other progenetic and nurturing associations , and this was borne  out in the cultures of the people . 
According to Campbell , the only godlike female figure in the Bible is the Virgin Mary , and she appears ,  identified  as virgin , only in the Gospel according to Luke . 
As Luke was a Greek , Campbell suggested that Mary was a carryover from the paganism of the ancient Greek pantheon . 
Although this might help  explain the Judeo-Christian-Muslim tendencies  to subjugate women ,  treating them essentially as chattel , it does not account for a similar treatment accorded * them in other cultures , notably that of Japan . 
It  is not entirely clear whether Campbell was commenting on Hinduism , Buddhism , etc. as they once existed , conceptually , for it  is unlikely that he could have ignored the treatment of women in the modern reflexes of the cultures adhering to those religous precepts . 
Campbell held that the ancient mythologies and religions are allegorical and that there was no real distinction between gods and goddesses , who  were given  sexual identity when in human form   only to make them more meaningful . 
With all respect , that seems  a highly debatable issue and one far too complex for this discussion , though we can certainly trace a diminution in the role of female divinities or divinity when we come  to examine Judaism and its congeners and progeny  . 
Other debatable aspects are the questions of whether the debasement of women is a reflection of the theology or the ritual , whether the scripture of any religion should be understood  allegorically or literally , and so forth . 
If there is something wrong , it behooves us to get at the roots of the problem , not to flail about wildly , for only after the source of a disease has been identified  can one properly investigate its cure . 
“ History according to Rosalind Miles ” blasts away at the symptoms in a misconceived notion that  alleviating them will effect a cure of the disease . 
In this jeremiad , males are viewed  as the “ enemy , ” and are so characterized  throughout the book , which  concludes with exhortations  to engage the foe and a strident call to arms  though not men 's  . 
Laurence Urdang 
Archaeology & Language 
Book Club Selection . 
Just when you thought 0 it  was safe  to assume that we now know all 0 we are ever likely to know  about the past , someone digs another hole and unearths  literally or figuratively  some ancient artifact : one day it is a fragile scroll , found * in a cave near the Dead Sea , that  turns out  to be pre-Biblical the next day it is an entire terracotta army of Chinese soldiers : the next it is a skull , excavated * from the Olduvai Gorge , that  compels anthropologists  once again   to revise their guesses about the earliest stages of Homo sapiens sapiens vs hominids . 
Most of the relies from the past are gone forever ,  destroyed  by the plows of countless generations of farmers , reduced  to rubble by erosion , by conquerors , by prehistoric and modern urban developers , by fire and flood , and just by time . 
Many , we may hope , have not yet been found  . 
The interest in man 's forebears did not become fashionable upon the publication  , a few years ago , of Roots : on a far larger scale , we have been trying  to discover all 0 we can *?*  about the origins not of men but of man . 
  Strange 0  to say  , however , that interest does not seem  to be more than a few hundred years old : if the ancient Greeks and Romans , the Indians , the Chinese and other peoples were curious about their own prehistory , I have not heard of it . 
Perhaps the fascination with man 's past grew out of the obsession with ruins evinced * by Romanticism ; certainly , modern archaeology seems  to have followed close behind , for the excavation of the supposed site of Troy took place only about 100 years ago . 
Perhaps it is just as well , for only by the means available to modern science are we now able  to preserve some of the artifacts that we find  and , through radiocarbon dating , determine their approximate age . 
Archaeology is a popular pursuit , and its manifest results not only receive considerable publicity but can be seen  in museums . 
Not so paleolinguistics , or the reconstruction of ancient languages . 
Even the remnants 0 we have  from early languages that  had a writing system are relatively sparse : Classical Latin and Greek , Hebrew , and a few other languages are better documented than others ; but for most all 0  we have  0  to go on  are a handful of tablets here , a few inscriptions there , barely enough in many cases  to allow us to identify the language , let alone draw any conclusions regarding its structure or meaning . 
Perhaps one day we shall find an Etruscan library , buried * deep in the Italian countryside ; but for the present , we have  to make  do with what we have  , which  is precious little . 
About languages that  had no writing system , we know nothing at all . 
But some very clever comparative linguists ,  beginning in Germany in the 19th century , theorized about how the nature of the ancestors of the more modern tongues . 
In some instances , ancient languages have been decoded  , some from multilingual inscriptions . 
The work of Jean Francois Champollion  1790-1832  in  deciphering hieroglyphics from the Rosetta Stone was an astonishing accomplishment , for it enabled us  to read the myriad writings of the ancient Egyptians on papyrus and in wall inscriptions and revealed an enormous amount of the knowledge 0 we have  today about their civilization , which  lasted for about 2600 years . 
Another significant break-through was that of Michael Ventris  1922-1956  who  deciphered the Linear script found * on Crete and identified it as an early form of Greek . 
From the standpoint of language , Ventris 's work was more important , particularly because it filled in a gap in our knowledge of the early states of Indo-European languages . 
Many years ago , a linguistic scholar counted all of the languages then spoken * of which he had evidence  . 
The total was approximately 2800 , but that is probably only a vague estimate : he undoubtedly missed some ; some  have sprung up since his time  modern Hebrew , for instance  ; and some have vanished . 
The exact count is unimportant and , at best , spurious , for it  is extremely difficult  to establish uniform criteria for what  distinguishes dialect from language . 
Then , too , one must examine the techniques used *  to group the many languages of the world . 
Linguists examining Classical Greek , Latin , German , English , Slavic , Swedish , Norwegian , Danish , Dutch , Lithuanian , Iranian , Hindi , and the other languages of India and Europe found that there were correspondences among many of the common words . 
Some , like French , Spanish , Italian , and Portuguese , had more in common with one another than they did *?* with , say , German , English , Swedish , Danish , and Dutch , which  , in turn , bore only a remote resemblance to Russian and Polish , on the one hand , and the two extant varieties of , say , Gaelic , on the other . 
One rapidly runs out of hands and must resort to fingers and toes , for after years of  laboriously categorizing these languages , the number of different main branches  called *  families and subfamilies  came to about ten . 
Ingeniously , certain differences between families were explained  by various phonetic shifts that   inexplicably  took place in one language group but not in another . 
Although certain other languages were geographically nearby , it  was impossible  to establish any resemblances between them , hence Basque , for example , is not classified  as  being in the same family with other European languages , nor are Hungarian and Finnish , both of which  belong to their own group *?* . 
At the conclusion of this vast exercise , done * without the aid of computers , there emerged a pattern of familial relationships that  linked together languages spoken * , in earlier times , from Britain as far east as Chinese Turkestan and from India as far north as Lappland . 
Charts showing the chief languages and their derivations can be found  in many dictionaries : — inside the front cover of The Random House Unabridged , for example . 
Because linguists are constantly learning more and more about the relationships among languages , it  is best  to avoid  using an older chart ; for the same reason , it  would be wise  not to stake too much on the accuracy of even a current chart . 
The languages discussed * here are what  are usually called   the Indo-European family ; similar family trees could be drawn  for the Semitic languages , Sino-Tibetan , Japanese , Bantu , Malayo-Polynesian , and so on . 
Each is a distinct phylum ; although there may be word-borrowing among them , lexicon is considered  less important in the classification of languages than structure and grammar . 
It  is important , too ,  to note that writing systems are irrelevant : for instance , Polish is written   today   using the Roman alphabet , but Russian , a related Slavic language , uses the Cyrillic ; Yiddish , a Germanic language , is written  in Hebrew characters ; Latin , Greek , and Sanskrit , which  resemble one another rather closely in some respects , all use different alphabets ; and early examples , utterly unrecognizable to untrained readers of modern languages , were written  in cuneiform , quite suitable for  writing on soft clay tablets with a pointed stylus , and hieroglyphics . 
It  would be nice  to think that while linguists were working so hard  to organize languages , they were working alongside the archaeologists who  were providing the raw materials . 
But only rarely did they collaborate and , with few exceptions , their work was not correlated  in a systematic way . 
Schliemann , who  discovered the site of Troy , used the evidence in Homer 's Iliad  to determine his digging site , where any ruins had long since disappeared from view  . 
In many other places , the ancient sites lay  buried  : — and  still do *?* : — beneath modern cities : modern property owners quite understandably take a dim view of  tearing down their buildings on the off chance that the remnants of an ancient town will be found  several yards below . 
today , before a new building is erected  in London , an archaeological team examines the cleared site for its archaeological significance . 
But there , as everywhere else , nothing can interfere with progress and , regardless of the finds and their importance , the archaeologist must eventually yield to the bulldozer . 
Notwithstanding , even the brief glimpses afforded * by such investigations can provide some insight into civilizations that  existed hundreds or , in some cases , thousands of years earlier . 
Based on the sparse evidence available , linguists theorized about the earlier languages that  had given rise to those attested * . 
In other words , based on what they knew  about a group of languages which  were documented  , they tried  to imagine the language that they sprang from  . 
In most cases , they dealt with words and functional elements ,  creating what  are called   reconstructions in hypothetical family prototypes called * , variously ,  Proto-Latin , Proto-Greek , Proto-Germanic , Proto-Indo-Iranian , and so forth , the ultimate goal being  to posit a single language called *  Proto-Indo-European . 
That is not entirely true , for linguists know too much about language  to suggest that there ever was , literally , a single language from which all Indo-European languages descended  . 
Nonetheless , it  is convenient  to think about the existence of a group of proto-dialects which  can be referred to  as Proto-Indo-European . 
It  seems  only natural that once an original language , or Ursprache , was posited  , the next step was  to speculate on its source , or Urheimat . 
That is what Renfrew has tried  to do  . 
Essentially , he proposes that the parent of all Indo-European languages was itself born  in central Anatolia , whence it spread eastward , westward , and northward  ,  being modified  by the influences of the languages with which it came into contact  , till it ultimately emerged in its recognizable , modern manifestations which we categorize  into Germanic , Hellenic , Italic , Indo-Iranian , Anatolian , Armenian , Celtic , Tocharian , Albanian , and BaltoSlavic . 
I have no quarrel with Renfrew 's theory : — notwithstanding the generally received wisdom that  has placed the homeland north of the Black Sea region and the Volga steppes . 
It  is difficult for the nonspecialist reader  like me  to assess the validity of his arguments , which  are based  on his contention that the language  and its congeners  were carried  along by the spread of nomad pastoralism . 
 Using the evidence available , Renfrew contends that the original Indo-European language , closely related to Hittite , separated after 6500 , with the languages of western Europe developing from western Anatolia and those of Iran , India , and Pakistan from the eastern division . 
The choice between the prevailing theory and Renfrew 's depends on whether one accepts a “ wave ” theory , first promulgated * more than a hundred years ago by Johnanes Schmidt , a German linguist , or one of indigenous development . 
Pottery finds can be interpreted   to support either the imposition of an elite culture from Turkmenia or a late development of the Indus civilization . 
Renfrew accepts the wave theory , and in the last two thirds of Archaeology & Language he sets forth his arguments in its favor . 
Unfortunately , the presentation of his linguistic argument , where the author is clearly treading on more speculative ground than in those parts dealing with outright archaeology , where he is on more familiar territory   , is disorganized and repetitious . 
It  is difficult  to place all the blame on Renfrew , for his editor should have noticed the lack of coherence . 
The result is an argument that  is persuasive but scarely convincing . 
Nevertheless , good books on archaeology assimilable by laymen are not easy 0  to find  , and if the reader can tolerate its shortcomings and is not overly concerned about the precise birthplace of Indo-European , Archaelogy & Language provides an interesting march through the millennia of prehistory in seven - league boots . 
Laurence Urdang 
Webster 's Electronic Thesaurus 
This software consists of two disks , one labeled   Installation and Program , the other  Synonym Linguibase , and a manual . 
The manual sets forth everything with clarity , and the program is simple 0  to install  ,  requiring only a few minutes . 
Only one thing made me a little suspicious when  cranking up the system  : in the descriptive text that  appears on the screen , the word labeled is spelt  “ labelled ” : —  decidedly un-American . 
However , I went ahead , and , since I was typing the text 0 you are reading  , returned to the beginning of the paragraph  to see how some of these words would fare  . 
I looked up the word preceding and was , after a brief moment , asked   to type in the word , which I did  . 
The screen bloomed forth with the following : 
Query : preceding 
1 adj  being before especially in time or arrangement
There were also some other parts of speech : one definition for the preposition and three for the verb  participial  senses . 
I called up the synonyms for the adj and the following appeared : 
Synonyms : antecedent , anterior , foregoing , former , past , precedent , previous , prior 
The way 0 the program works  is this : one uses the cursor  to highlight a particular word for which synonyms are desired   . 
It is similar  , in principle , to  finding a synonym in a synonym dictionary and then looking up its synonyms  to find them . 
I am not sure why , but I expected the program to “ network ” in the same way . 
However , when I highlighted antecedent  , what  appeared on the screen was the same list of synonyms but with antecedent missing , and preceding had reappeared . 
If all this is too complicated 0  to follow  ,  let me summarize : 
you look up word and get synonyms , , , , , , and . 
You look up the synonyms for word , and you get synonyms , , , , , , and . 
Even the definition provided * for the sub-listings is identical in wording to that of the word originally sought * . 
This is very economical of space and involves a clever computer ploy , but it does not provide a particularly useful synonym dictionary , for , as we all know *?* , synonymy in language does not yield to the commutative law of mathematics ; in language , “ Things equal to the same thing are not  necessarily  equal to each other . ” 
Perhaps the Proximity people thought that they had got round that little problem by  giving the same definition for each of the items in the list ; but we know that only very rarely are two synonyms bi-unique  which  is another way of  saying that if  =  ,  does not necessarily always equal   an ineluctable fact of language . 
If a relatively limited access to a synonym dictionary is likely  to be of use , then this package may be of service . 
It works with a hard disk or with a set of floppies and can be used  with 29 popular word - processing programs . 
 That was the number listed * when I received my copy  ; it might have increased .  
It also has a few neat features , like  suggesting a few alternatives if you happen  to think that preceding is spelt  “ preceeding ”  as many people do *?*  . 
It has a useful “ Help ” feature that  can be called upon  at any stage . 
Also , if you enter jump , you get the synonyms for that ; but if you enter jumped , you get the same synonyms but inflected * : — including the variants leapt , leaped for leap . 
All in all , for a relatively primitive system , it is not too bad ; but you would have  to be in love with your computer  to use it in preference to a far more complete books of synonyms available  especially The Synonym Finder , Rodale in the and Canada , Longman elsewhere , which  offers more than 800,000 synonyms , more than three times the number listed * in any other synonym book  . 
The blurb on this book / disk package reads , “  Supplies you with 470,000 true synonyms for 40,000 entries . ” 
My guess is that such a quantity might be reached  if one counted all the permutations and combinations ; in reality , though , there are probably far fewer actual words . 
Readers can judge for themselves the validity of this numerical legerdemain . 
Laurence Urdang 
Family Words 
In 1962 , American Speech published “ Family Words in English , ” by Allen Walker Read , which  was reprinted  in  Vol. I , No. 4 ,  1975  . 
The article is a classic , probably the first on the subject 0  to appear in a scholarly journal , though there are other informal references to family language , some of which  are documented  by Dickson in his Bibliography . 
Family words and expressions crop up everywhere . 
Some are quite unique and their reporters can not imagine their origin ; others , like Penn Station , “ what one family terms a child 's misinterpretation of a famous line or phrase   , ” are clear : the generic term comes from the Lord 's Prayer : — “ And  lead us not into Penn Station . ” 
Obviously , that works only for kids familiar with New York City . 
Other Penn Stations : Our Father , which  art in heaven , Harold be Thy name . 
Land where the Pilgrims pried  . 
Bells on cocktails ring . 
I pledge my allowance to the flag . 
Gladly the cross-eyed bear 
Onward Christian Soldiers , Marching as to War , With the cross-eyed Jesus , Leaning on the phone . 
... One nation , invisible ... 
... One nation , in a vegetable ... 
Many people know  for ` family hold back , ' an exhortation ensuring ample provender for guests . 
This is not  to suggest that Dickson 's book is a catalogue of bloopers , or what Amsel Greene  and Jack Smith  like  to call   pullet surprises . 
There are many interesting entries in Family Words which ,  as far as I know , is the first documentation of the genre . 
There are occasional hidden entries , as the list of diseases : — among them the dread mohogus : — under the entry for Fowlenzia . 
 In the family , some suffer from Fowler 's pip , an affliction affecting language fanatics who  base a slavish purism on a literal interpretation of Modern English Usage .  
Family Words is useful and fun . 
Inevitably , some of the entries are more imaginative than others ; Dickson will have his hands full if everyone responds  giving private words . 
Please  sent yours to the author , c / o Addison-Wesley , Reading , 01867 , not to  . 
Laurence Urdang 
Midwesterner , Will Hays , Jr, who  is proud of his knowledge of post-Civil-War history , tells me the following origin of shot , as in shotglass , absent from “  Gunning for the English Language ” : 
Although we associate trench warfare with World War I , trenches were characteristic also of the Civil War . 
scaffold was built  so that a rifleman : — who  fired a single-shot , muzzle-loading shoulder weapon : — could step up and shoot over the top of the trench . 
The soldier in charge would command , after each firing , that the rank on the scaffold step down and be replaced  by the rank that  had just reloaded ,  thus alternating ranks and sustaining the rifle fire . 
That war , like others , produced disgruntled veterans and those more adventurous or more restless after military service . 
They moved westward  to start a new life . 
The population increased markedly , with corresponding demands for goods and services , among them the need for saloons . 
Most new saloons were small and the bars short ,  accommodating with difficulty the many bunched * up , in ranks , if you will *?* ,  calling for whiskey . 
Many of the thirsty crowd were veterans , as were many of the bartenders *?* . 
Thus , “  Step down or back and give me a shot ” was readily understood  . 
I 've not been able  to corroborate this explanation , but I 'll never forget it . 
Mr. Joseph Hymes ' “  Do Mistake : —  Learn Better ” , 1 brought to mind the time 0 a Japanese acquaintance told me of a friend of hers who  decided  to tackle the original English version of three books 0 she had enjoyed  while in Japan  . 
She boldly marched into a bookstore and asked the salesclerk for a copy each of Hemingway 's The Sun Come Up Again and  Throw Away the Gun and Steinbeck 's The Angry Grape . 
Is there a term for the errors that  creep in while  translating a passage back into the original tongue ? 
Mr. Davidson 's observations on the Scottishness of Chambers 20th Century Dictionary , 1 bear out my own formed * over sixteen years of  using one . 
An odd sidelight on this came a few days after  reading the article . 
Definitions under pet end with “ Petting Party  coll.  a gathering for the purpose of caressing as an organised sport . 
 Origin unknown ; not from Gaelic  ” 
I think it  hardly fanciful  to discern a note of Calvinist disapproval in this curt disclaimer . 
Although I greatly enjoyed Richard Lederer 's article , I fear that one of his paragraphs is a load of brass monkey balls . 
The monkey on board ship was a lad employed *  to fetch supplies : — powder and so forth : — to the guns . 
The word might also have been used  for a receptacle near the guns where powder and balls were kept   . 
However , this receptacle would have taken the form of a wooden box or something similar . 
The idea of a metal stand carrying a pyramid of cannon balls so delicately balanced as  to be affected  by the tiny differential expansion of brass and iron does not bear  thinking about  in a heavy sea . 
So what is the explanation of the phrase cold enough  to freeze the balls off a brass monkey  ? 
Well , the obvious one , I believe . 
Anybody who  asks “ Why a brass monkey ? ” is probably not aware that brass monkeys were very common household ornaments in England in the 19th and early 20th centuries . 
Originally , they were probably imported  from India , but were later mass-produced  in places such as Birmingham  to grace Victorian and Edwardian mantelshelves . 
They can still be found  today in so - called “ gift shops . ” 
Usually , they come in sets of three , one with its hands over its eyes , one over its ears , and one over its mouth : they were said  to represent “  See no evil , Hear no evil , Speak no evil . ” 
There were various whimsical variants . 
I am sure 0 I am not the first 0  to point out Joseph Hynes 's , “  Do Mistake : — Learn Better , ” , 1 mistakes in  Japanizing English words , e. g, sei fu not “ safe-o , ” nain not “ nine-o . ” 
The possibilities for  representing English with a language of only forty-seven syllables are not that numerous , and the rules are very consistent . 
The main problems are representing consonant clusters and word - final consonants . 
These difficulties produce such monstrosities as sutoraike for English ` strike ' : — one syllable in English , five in Japanese . 
Every Japan veteran has his list of favorite mistakes . 
Mine are the ones that  are possible , but wrong , English . 
 Adding the Japanese final vowels produces  Gone with the Windo . 
Hypercorrection , where Japanese speakers learn that many final vowels do not exist in the American version of the tongue and so remove them  , sometimes incorrectly , gives us the California cities of San Francisk and Sacrament . 
This process resulted in the sign reading Pizz and Coffee . 
My absolute favorite of these semantic mistakes , however , does not come from the problem of sound . 
Japanese has a verb inflection which  expresses causation or permission : — in English , “  to make someone  or to let someone  do something . ” 
One day during a university English class , a very discomfited student , after frantic and obtrusive dictionary work , handed a colleague of mine a scrap of paper . 
On it was written  this sentence : “ Please  make me go to the bathroom . ” 
You Could Look It Up 
As everyone in the world must know *?* by now , William Safire writes a column in The New York Times Magazine called *  “ On Language . ” 
 Considering the circulation of The New York Times on Sundays , his column is probably the most widely read commentary on contemporary English in the world ; that places more than one uncommon burden on a writer : he must do his utmost  to be accurate ; he must try  to select subjects likely  to be of interest to his readers ; and he must write well . 
Those familiar with Safire 's editorial style , reflected * in his political columns on the editorial pages of The Times , may agree with me in the contention that when he writes about language  he seems  to be writing on his day off : I can not put my finger on why , but “ On Language ” always strikes me as an excruciating effort  to be cute . 
In part , that is attributable to the designation of his correspondents , who  keep him  informed * on language that  is not within earshot , as the “ Lexicographic Irregulars , ” an amusing reference the first time or two 0 it was used  but now beginning  to cloy  . 
More often than it might prove  of interest to me , personally , Safire deals with insiders ' language in Washington  where he is based    or with trivialities uttered * by some politico . 
As Andrew Norman wrote *?* , in a letter published * in this book on page 113 , “ You flit freely back and forth between prescriptivism and descriptivism . ” 
But are not many of us guilty of that ? 
We are descriptive of the usages 0 we accept  and prescriptive : — perhaps proscriptive would be more descriptive : — of those 0 we do not like  . 
At least Safire expresses an opinion ; whether the reader agrees with him is another matter , as are the questions of his accuracy , which  arise fairly often , and that of the suitability of his style , which  , as far as I know , has not been broached  before . 
It  ill behooves me , excoriated * recently as enamored of the “ cheap larf , ”  to criticize Safire 's arch puns , which  permeate : — “ enliven ” is probably the word 0 his editor would use  : — his articles , but I find some kinds of humor unsuitable for reading , however they might evoke a chuckle when  uttered  viva voce   . 
handful of examples , from the book at hand : 
Therefore , I stand uncorrected . 
p. 112 
... “  Get your hand off my knee . ” 
 That 's a mnemonic , pronounced * knee-MONIC .  
Ize Right , ?  title , p. 114  
Juggernaughty but Nice  title , p. 115  
... slanguist ... p. 116 
Lex Appeal  title , p. 121  
Logue-Rolling  title , p. 123  
 on -logue vs. -log :  Some people prefer their logues sawed * off ... p. 123 But the Library of Congress wants  to be non-U  in its spelling of -logue words  . 
ibid. 
Writing containing such labored figures makes for hard reading . 
I am interested in what Safire has  to say  about language but find myself stymied  : I get the feeling that he has deliberately created a minefield of interruptions in thought through which I must pick my way  to the end . 
Notwithstanding the valuable role 0 he plays  in  inspiring nonlinguists  to think about language and in  informing them about myriad facets of the subject , I find it hard slogging  or , as he would probably write *?* , “ sloguing ”  . 
You Could Look It Up is the umpteenth collection of Safire 's columns and , like the previous collections , contains a selection of letters from readers . 
It is those that  are so sorely missed  in his column . 
 True , there is an occasional mention in his column of a point raised * by a correspondent , and the Letters section of the Magazine prints a comment from time to time , but an important feature of the books is their inclusion of far more writer-reader interaction than one might suspect from  reading the column alone . 
For one thing , the letter-writers call attention to errors or misinterpretations and are largely critical . 
Safire can not be accused  of  being copy - proud  except , evidently , of awful puns , as in “ Ms. is deliberately msterious , but at least it is not deliberately msleading ” and other mscegenations  . 
There is no gainsaying that Safire is one of the most influential writers on contemporary English , and it  is essential that his books be in the libraries of all who  are interested in the subject , regardless of their alignment with his opinions . 
For one thing , he documents many neologisms , an activity that  endears him to many working lexicographers . 
From the sometimes cavalier manner in which he treats his subject  , one wonders if Safire feels the burden of the responsibility 0 he has  toward his readers . 
The publisher sent unrevised bound proofs from which this review was prepared   ; unfortunately , there was no proof of an index , but the publisher has assured me that there will be one in the published book , a rather essential ingredient of a work with this title . 
Laurence Urdang 
Webster 's New World Guide to Current American Usage 
Here is a commonsense style book , useful to those who  have the education and common sense  to be in doubt about questions of English usage . 
It has some problems , if you want  to be sticky about things : on p. xv we read :  Einstein 's Special Theory of Relativity does not say that  =  and in leap year  . 
Indeed it does not *?* . 
But it does say  = mc² ; the version with the capital and is , essentially , meaningless to those familiar with the conventional symbolism used * in physics . 
While I acknowledge that it  is not easy  to know how  to sort out the many topics 0  to be covered  in a usage book  , most reasonable writers have taken a stab at  writing an entry under a heading that  seems  a likely place 0  to look  , then have provided a detailed index . 
Not Bernice Randall . 
 True , one can find different from , etc, in an entry so headed * , but for absolute constructions one is referred  to an entry called *  “  Covered  with onions , relish , and ketchup , I ate a hotdog at the ball-park . ” 
If the user wants  to find out about misplaced adjectives and adverbs , reference is made  to the entry “ Electric shaver for women with delicate floral design on the handle . ” 
search for only would be futile . 
Perhaps the subject and treatment of usage need some lightening up , but I am hard put  to agree that they are quite as frivolous and light-headed as this book would have us believe . 
Fun is fun , but those who  might rely on such a book are quite serious about the information 0 they are seeking  , and it  is unfair  to play fast and loose with their sincerity . 
sense of humor about a subject is born of a feeling of security about it , but security is the one characteristic often lacking among those who  would use Current American Usage . 
There is no doubt that Randall enjoys her work . 
But of what use is a long entry on spoonerisms  ? 
And of what use are the interminable examples , for instance , of the misuse of like for as , which  draw out the entry to three pages  ? 
More than four pages are devoted  to clichés  under the guise of “ Lo and behold , it 's man 's best friend , ” which ,   being an exclamation , really ought  to end in an exclamation point  . 
The article on British / American English  “ There 's no home like Eaton Place . ”  is a good one , but , at six pages , its utility is questionable . 
In the matter of pronunciations of BrEng names , it  is an old-fashioned fantasy of Americans that Brits go round  saying POM-frit for Pontefract : most Brits that I have heard  give the name a spelling pronunciation these days ; and so with many of the old shibboleths . 
Of what relevance  to usage , notwithstanding the fact that the topic is interesting  is an entry on eponyms  “ John Bull and John Hancock are not just any johns . ”   ? 
That is not ,  strictly speaking , a subject pertinent to the title of the book . 
All of which  is  to say that the book is an interesting work on the language and contains accurate , though longwinded information about what it covers  , “ interesting and useful facts about American English . ” 
Its only real faults are its title , which  belies the content , the cutesy headings , and the lack of a truly detailed index : self-indexing does not provide coverage of sufficient detail . 
As a reference work on usage , it is far from complete : The Simon and Schuster Publicity Department could have used an entry on foreword / forward  spelt * “ foreward ” in the release accompanying the review copy  . 
longish section , “ Some Troublesome Idiomatic Prepositions , ” and a “ Glossary of Grammatical and Linguistic Terms Used * in This Book , ” followed * by a list of “ References , ” sources associated * with specific entries , round out the work . 
Laurence Urdang 
Language Notes from Abroad 
“ Once more unto the breach for the warriors of 1'Académie Française in their uphill battle  to preserve the purity of their native tongue . 
Examples of franglais which they find  particularly monstrous are , I hear , to be condemned  to a newly created “ Musée des horreurs . ” 
The first is “ sponsor , sponsoriser , sponsorisation . ” 
The academy also calls upon all French  to send in further examples of “ linguistic pollution , ”  observing ruefully that this is one museum which  will be open 12 months a year . 
But the savants have passed barman , blazer , bobsleigh , and boycott as fit for inclusion in their new dictionary . ” 
 From The Times , 15 January 1988  
Letter to the Editor of The Times 
Penny Perrick regrets  January 11  that “ There is no word in English 0  to describe that particular , special sort of pride that one feels  in the achievements of one 's children . ” 
But the verb kvell , which  exactly expresses that emotion , is  already  like other Yiddish loanwords , such as chutzpah , meshugga and nosh  to be found  in the Supplement to the Oxford-English Dictionary . 
If you think that the practice in some Muslim countries of  amputating the hand of a thief is harsh ,  beware of  participating in horse shows in England , where there is no capital punishment but the issue arises every few years  :  carriage and team of Cleveland Bay horses ,  driven  by Mr Fred Pendlebury ...  were  approaching the water obstacle during the cross-country section of the Harrods International Grand Prix when the leading pair became confused , turned back and became entangled  with the second pair  . 
Mr Pendlebury , of Smithills , near Bolton , Greater Manchester , was eliminated  . 
 From The Times , 16 May 1988  
Loose Cannons & Red Herrings 
Readers should be familiar with Robert Claiborne 's earlier books , especially Our Marvelous Native Tongue : The Life and Times of the English Language . 
One might say that  subtitling the present book “ Book of Lost Metaphors ” is an example of a loose canon sic : — unless metaphor is taken  in its broadest sense : — but one is unlikely  to find red herrings here : the etymologies of a few hundred words and phrases are given  , many not readily findable in standard works of reference . 
The rationale behind  referring to them as “ lost ” arises from the author 's observation of an unfortunate state of affairs : because of an increasingly widespread lack of familiarity with the basic , structural elements of our culture : — Greek and Roman mythology , the Bible , literature , and ordinary historical fact : — people today are unable  to discern the origins of terms like aphrodisiac , Achilles sic heel or tendon ,  meet one 's Waterloo ,  sow dragon 's teeth , and hand-writing on the wall ,  to name a few . 
There are many , of course , but unaccountably , they are not the focus of this book . 
Claiborne investigates  and reports on  expressions like  sow one 's wild oats , about which he tells us little or nothing  : the modern Latinate designation Avena fatua came too many centuries after the original expression  to have any relevance to it , so why  bring up the information that fatua is Latin for ` foolish '  : it was also Latin for ` wild , ' which  might be more to the point . 
In any event , it  is hard  to discern , from the arch style affected * in an attempt  to make dull facts interesting , just what is the origin of  sow one 's wild oats  . 
In many entries , Claiborne labors the obvious ,  offering little or nothing 0 we do not already know  , could easily imagine , or for which the author offers no explanation  . 
Among examples of the first are  spit and polish , on the spot , on the square ,  stick one 's neck out , etc . 
Examples of the last include  spill the beans ,  square the circle , stalemate , etc . 
Between these is  an occasional flash of useful wisdom , much of it pretty well covered  by other books of this type  which  seem  to be proliferating  . 
What  is missing , for example , at  square the circle , is the information that because the area of a circle is mathematically calculated   using pi , which  is irrational , there is no mathematical way of  calculating the dimensions of a square with the same area as that of a given circle . 
But that does not mean that such a square can not exist . 
As for stalemate , which  is related  to checkmate , would it  not have been important  to indicate that the : - mate part has nothing 0  to do  with English ,  having been borrowed  from checkmate which  is a loanword from Persian  and has nothing 0  to do  with check , either  . 
Often , an entry offers nothing in the way of etymology and merely explains the meaning . 
Does any reader need an entry like this one ? 
straddle . 
When you straddle a horse  , you 've got one leg on either side of the animal . 
When a politican straddles an issue  , he 's in much the same position . 
Some speculative suggestions , as the derivation or reinforcement from Seidlitz powders for  take a powder are sheer nonsense . 
Not all entries contain misleading , dull , or incorrect information , but those that  do not *?* are marked  by a lack of originality . 
Laurence Urdang 
Word Maps 
Dialect geography , a branch of dialectology , describes certain features of the dialects of a language and their distribution . 
The field is about 100 years old . 
Most prominent among its earliest practitioners in England was  Joseph Wright , who  prepared the six - volume English Dialect Dictionary , which  was published  between 1898 and 1905 ; the best - known contemporary British specialist is Harold Orton . 
In America , work proceeded space during the 1930s , largely under the direction of Raven McDavid , Hans Kurath , and , later , Harold Allen ; more recently , Lee Pedersen and others have investigated American English dialects . 
Between 1948 and 1961 , fieldworkers based * at the University of Leeds conducted the Survey of English Dialects , which  studied 313 localities in England  which  , as everyone ought  to know *?* , does not include Wales or Scotland  . 
The present book is extracted  from the two major works that  resulted from the Survey , The Linguistic Atlas of England  1978  and Word Geography of England  1974  both under the direction of Harold Orton , aided * by Sanderson and Widdowson in the latter effort . 
People generally seem  to find dialect study interesting . 
One letter writer to The Times  21 June 1988  reported : Our close neighbour ... in Bere Regis , who  was born  in the village and who  speaks with a delicious Dorset burr , always uses “ I ” instead of “ me . ” ... 
“ Well , it makes company for I and company for she . ” 
Another of his happy expressions is inner-wards , meaning ` since , ' as in ... “ I chucked him out the door and he 's not been back innerwards . ” 
Another reported  same date  :  Let 's get it right . 
The Bristol for “ me ” is not “ I , ” but “ oi . ” 
When I was teaching there  , the explanation invariably given * by boys brought * to me for scrapping in the playground was : “ Ee it oi , so oi it ee . ” 
The 100 maps selected * for representation from the Survey yield information on several hundred words , some of which  are clear variants , others quite different lexical entities . 
For instance , Map 34 shows the areas , marked * off by boundary lines , where the variants chimley chimbley , chimmock , chimdey , chimbey , and chimney occur  . 
Map 33 shows the distribution of child  most of southern England  and of bairn  north of a slightly wavy line between Boston , on the Wash to the east , and Lancaster , on the west coast  . 
The authors have provided a brief introduction which  is easy 0  to follow  , a list of suggested readings , and the names and addresses of the several institutions and societies in Britain where readers may indulge a more intensive interest in dialect study  . 
The maps are clear , each occupying a full page , and the word information is well set  forth on them . 
Where necessary , brief but not cryptic explanations  are provided  of any information that  might seem  to be out of the ordinary . 
I have only one nit 0  to pick  with the authors . 
In their description of isoglosses , they write : These are drawn   to run midway between / localities which  were shown by the Survey of English Dialects  to use the different words or pronunciations which  are the subject of the map . 
Although it  is true that isoglosses , in effect , set off the various areas where a particular usage was recorded   , more accurately an isogloss is drawn   to connect sites either where speakers employ both usages  or where speakers using one or the other live in very close proximity  . 
Hence , the term isogloss , from iso - ` same ' + gloss ` word , ' 0  to describe the line on a map where the terms are of equal distribution  . 
Isoglosses are to dialect maps what isobars and isotherms are  to weather maps , what isobaths are  to geophysical maps of the oceans , etc . 
The authors are not alone in  getting this wrong : it is incorrect in some dictionaries . 
In those countries where dialect study is undertaken   , dialectologists observe that there are today many factors militating against the strict maintenance of older dialect boundaries : the standardization of terminology as  adopted  by national periodicals , news services , radio , and television ; the establishment of “ prestige ” dialects and , through the media , their promulgation ; and the huge population shifts that  have taken place , particularly in the since  . 
Such shifts have been somewhat slower in England , but seem now  to be speeding up . 
There are many other , lesser factors at work , but  taken together , all tend toward standardization , especially as the older speakers die off . 
In some respects , it may not be long before certain aspects of dialect geography will be largely historical . 
The importance of dialect is emphasized  regularly in the press , where we read about people being killed  , as in parts of India , because they use the wrong shibboleths  . 
This book is a good introduction to the subject  in England  ; those familiar with dialectology in America , and those interested in the study in England or , indeed , generally would be well advised   to add Word Maps to their libraries . 
Laurence Urdang 
American Literary Almanac 
This is an interesting , useful reference book containing information about the better - known writers of America . 
It is divided  into eighteen chapters varying in length , each dealing with a different aspect of the authors and their works , among them , Writers Related to Writers Schooldays  which colleges and universities  spawned which writers  American Literary Pseudonyms American Literary Title Sources Literary Cons : Hoaxes , Frauds , and Plagiarism in American Literature The Profession of Authorship : Authors / Publishers / Editors / Agents  Thrown  to the Wolves : Reviews and Reviewers
These are supplemented  by an extensive Bibliography and a detailed Index . 
As  can be seen  from the chapter headings , some of the material is trivial , but nonetheless interesting for that . 
It  is not at once apparent why the book is styled   an “ almanac  , ” but that is unimportant : there is no other book 0 I know of  that  contains as much diverse information about American writers as this one . 
Its readability and organization make it suitable for browsing : — even for  reading straight through : — so in that respect , at least , it does not resemble books in the “ Oxford Companion ” series . 
It contains many photographs of writers , some quite early ; these enliven the appearance of the book but accomplish little else , unless one is interested in what Samuel Clemens looked like  at the age of 15  as a printer 's devil  or in the appearance of Hart Crane standing in the middle of a railroad track in Cleveland in 1916 . 
It  is difficult  to make any sensible connection between the lives of authors and their creations . 
handful might have led colorful existences , some are objects of interest because they died early , committed suicide , were related  to other famous people , and so forth ; but such information seldom reveals as much about their output as do the creations themselves *?* , and in certain cases one is probably better off  not knowing quite so much . 
This book appears  to have been diligently researched  and has much 0  to recommend it as an adjunct to most libraries , public and private , large and small , general and specialized . 
Laurence Urdang 
“ Faculty protest against apartheid at Cornell . ” 
 news tease ,  , Rochester , . 
 Submitted  by .  
“  the tenor  brings the opera to its climax in his final suicide . ” 
 From a review of Handel 's Tamerlano in the issue of Stereo Review . 
 Submitted  by .  
I would like  to make a couple of comments on articles in the Autumn 1988 issue , 2 . 
Re the article on Cuthbert , Dickens uses intercourse  to mean ` communication between people ' in Christmas Carol when Scrooge says “ I will not be the man 0 I must have been  but for this intercourse ” to the third Spirit  . 
I would think that the words grand and stretch would be known  to more people than two of the words 0 the author gives  as  being familiar  chippy and hootch  . 
Incidentally , I seem  to recall  reading somewhere that skins as slang for ` dollars ' dates from frontier days when trappers used animal skins as currency  , and is therefore much older than early 20th-century Harlem . 
“ ... the party consisted of Beckett , Dame Peggy Ashcroft , Harold Pinter , and the late Alan Webb . ” 
 
 
 
wsj_1640.mrg 
 
 
Electronic theft by foreign and industrial spies and disgruntled employees is costing  companies billions and eroding their international competitive advantage . 
That was the message delivered * by government and private security experts at an all - day conference on corporate electronic espionage . 
Hostile and even friendly nations routinely steal information from  companies and share it with their own companies , said  Noel Matchett , a former staffer at the federal National Security Agency and now president of Information Security Inc, Silver Spring , Md . 
It may well be that theft of business data is as serious  a strategic threat to national security as it is a threat to the survival of victimized  firms , said 0  Michelle Van Cleave , the White House 's assistant director for National Security Affairs . 
 
The conference was jointly sponsored  by the New York Institute of Technology School of Management and the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association , a joint industry - government trade group . 
Any secret can be pirated  , the experts said 0 *?* , if it is transmitted  over the air . 
Even rank amateurs can do it if they spend a few thousand dollars for a commercially available microwave receiver with amplifier and a recorder . 
They need  only position themselves near a company 's satellite dish and wait . 
You can have a dozen competitors stealing your secrets at the same time , Mr. Matchett said  ,  adding : It  's a pretty good bet 0 they wo n't get caught  . 
The only way 0  to catch an electronic thief  , he said 0 *?* , is  to set him up with erroneous information . 
 
Even though electronic espionage may cost  firms billions of dollars a year , most are n't yet taking precautions , the experts said 0  . 
By contrast , European firms will spend $ 150 million  this year on electronic security , and are expected  to spend $ 1 billion  by 1992 . 
Already many foreign firms , especially banks , have their own cryptographers , conference speakers reported 0  . 
Still ,  encrypting corporate communications is only a partial remedy . 
 
One expert , whose job  is so politically sensitive that he spoke on condition that he would n't be named or quoted  , said 0 the expected influx of East European refugees over the next few years will greatly increase the chances of computer - maintenance workers , for example , doubling as foreign spies . 
Moreover , he said 0 *?* , technology  now exists for  stealing corporate secrets after they 've been erased  from a computer 's memory . 
He said that Oliver North of Iran - Contra notoriety thought 0 he had erased his computer but that the information was later retrieved  for congressional committees to read . 
No personal computer , not even the one on a chief executive 's desk , is safe , this speaker noted 0  . 
Mark Goode , president of Micronyx Inc, a Richardson , Texas , firm that  makes computer - security products , provided a new definition for Mikhail Gorbachev 's campaign for greater openness , known * commonly as glasnost . 
Under Mr. Gorbachev , Mr. Goode said 0 *?* , the Soviets are openly stealing Western corporate communications . 
He cited the case of a Swiss oil trader who  recently put out bids  via telex for an oil tanker 0  to pick up a cargo of crude in the Middle East . 
Among the responses 0 the Swiss trader got  was  one from the Soviet national shipping company , which  had n't been invited   to submit a bid . 
The Soviets ' eavesdropping paid off , however , because they got the contract . 
